What are your thoughts on the ongoing war in Ukraine?
How do you analyze it within your framework about war?
How far would they go to hang onto power
when push came to shove?
Is I think the thing that worries me the most
and is plainly what worries most people
about the risk of nuclear war?
Like at what point does that unchecked leadership
decide that this is worth it?
Especially if they can emerge from the rubble still on top.
The following is a conversation with Chris Blatman,
professor at the University of Chicago
studying the causes and consequences of violence and war.
This he explores in his new book called Why We Fight,
The Roots of War and the Paths to Peace.
The book comes out on April 19th,
so you should preorder it to support Chris and his work.
This is the Lux Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors
in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's Chris Blatman.
In your new book titled Why We Fight,
The Roots of War and the Paths for Peace,
you write, quote, let me be clear
what I mean when I say war.
I don't just mean countries duking it out.
I mean any kind of prolonged violence
struggle between groups.
That includes villages, clans, gangs, ethnic groups,
religious sects, political factions, and nations.
Wildly different as these may be,
their origins have much in common.
We'll see that the Northern Irish zealots,
Colombian cartels, European tyrants,
Liberian rebels, Greek oligarchs,
Chicago gangs, Indian mobs, Rwandan jenna,
Sydares, and you word I learned, thank you to you.
Those are people who administer genocide.
English soccer hooligans and American invaders.
So first, let me ask, what is war?
In saying that war is a prolonged violence struggle
between groups, what do the words prolonged
groups and violent mean?
I sit at the sort of intersection of economics
and political science.
And I also dwell a little bit in psychology,
but that's partly because I'm married to a psychologist,
sometimes do research with her.
All these things are really different.
So if you're a political scientist,
you spend a lot of time just classifying
a really narrow kind of conflict and studying that.
And that's an important way to make progress
as a social scientist, but I'm not trying to make progress.
I'm trying to sort of help everybody step back and say,
you know what, there's like some common things
that we know from these disciplines
that relate to a really wide range of phenomenon.
Basically, we can talk about them in a very similar way
and we can get really similar insights.
So I wanted to actually bring them together,
but I still had to like say,
let's hold out individual violence,
which has a lot in common,
but individuals choose to engage in violence
for more and sometimes different reasons.
So let's just put that aside so that we can focus a bit.
And let's really put aside short incidents of violence
because those might have the same kind
of things explaining them,
but actually there's a lot of other things
that can explain short violence.
Short violence can be really demonstrative.
Like you can just,
I can use it to communicate information.
The thing that all of it has in common
is that it doesn't generally make sense.
It's not your best option most of the time.
And so I wanted to say,
let's take this thing that should be puzzling.
We kind of think it's normal.
We kind of think this is what all humans do,
but let's point out that it's not normal
and then figure out why and let's talk about why.
And so that's, so I was trying to throw out the short violence.
I was trying to throw out the individual violence.
I was also trying to throw out all the competition
that happens that's not violent.
That's the normal competition.
I was trying to say, let's talk about violent competition
because that's kind of the puzzle.
So that's really interesting.
So you said usually people try to find a narrow definition
and you said progress.
So you make progress by finding a narrow definition,
for example, of military conflict in a particular context.
And progress means, all right,
well, how do we prevent this particular kind
of military conflict?
Or maybe if it's already happening,
how do we deescalate it and how do we solve it?
So from a geopolitics perspective,
from an economics perspective,
and you're looking for a definition of war
that is as broad as possible,
but not so broad that you cannot achieve a deep level
of understanding of why it happens
and how it can be avoided.
Right, and a comment, basically like recognize
that common principles govern some kinds of behavior
that look pretty different.
Like an Indian ethnic riot is obviously pretty different
than invading a neighboring country, right?
But, and that's pretty different than two villages
or two gangs.
A lot of what I work on is studying organized criminals
and gangs.
You know, where you think is really different.
And of course it is, but there are some common principles.
You can just think about conflict and the use of violence
and not learn everything, but just get a lot.
Just get really, really far by sort of seeing
the commonalities rather than just focusing
on the differences.
So again, those words are prolonged groups and violent.
Can you maybe linger in each of those words?
What does prolonged mean?
Where's the line between short and long?
What does groups mean and what does violent mean?
So let me, you know, I have a friend who,
someone who's become a friend through the process
of my work and writing this book also,
who was 20, 30 years ago was a, was gang leader in Chicago.
So this guy named Napoleon English or Knapp.
And I remember one time he was saying,
well, you know, when I was young, I used to,
I was just 15, 16 and he'd go to the neighboring
gang's territory.
He says, I'd go gang banging.
And I said, well, I didn't know what that meant.
I said, what does that mean?
And he said, oh, that's just meant I'd shoot him up.
Like I'd shoot at buildings, I might shoot at people.
I wasn't trying to kill the, he wasn't trying to kill them.
He was just trying to sort of send a signal
that he was a tough guy and he was fearless
and he was someone who they should be careful with.
And so I didn't want to call that war, right?
That was, that was, that's something different.
That was, it was short, it was kind of sporadic
and he wasn't, and he was, he was basically
trying to send them information.
And this is what countries do all the time, right?
We have military parades and we,
we might have border skirmishes and,
and I wanted to sort of, so is it,
what's short is a three month border skirmish, a war?
I mean, I don't, I don't try to get into those things.
I don't want to, but I want to point out that like,
these long grueling months and years of violence
are like, are the problem in the puzzle.
And I just, I didn't want to spend a lot of time talking
about the international version of gang banging.
It's a different phenomenon.
So what is it about Napoleon that doesn't nap,
let's call him, not to add confusion,
that doesn't qualify for war?
Is it the individual aspect?
Is it that violence is not the thing that is sought,
but the communication of information is what is sought?
Or is it the shortness of it?
Is it all of those?
It's a little bit, I mean, he was the head of a group
where he's becoming the head of a group at that point.
And that group eventually did go to war
with those neighboring gangs,
which is to say it was just long drawn out conflict
over months and months and months.
But I think one of the big insights from my fields
is that you're constantly negotiating over something, right?
Whether you're officially negotiating
or you're all posturing, like you're bargaining over something
and you should be able to figure out a way to split that pie
and you could use violence,
but violence is everybody's miserable.
Like if you're napped, like if you start a war,
one, there's lots of risks, you can get killed,
that's not good.
You could kill somebody else and go to jail,
which is what happened to him, that's not good.
Your soldiers get killed,
no one's buying your drugs in the middle of the confight,
so it interrupts your business.
And so on and on, it's like, it's really miserable.
This is what we're seeing right now,
as we're recording, the Russian invasion of Ukraine
is now at fourth or fifth week.
Everybody's, if it didn't dawn on them before,
it's dawned on them now just how brutal and costly this is.
As you described for everybody,
so everybody is losing in this war.
Yeah, I mean, that's maybe the insight.
Everybody loses something from war
and there was usually, not always,
but the point is there was usually a way
to get what you wanted or be better off
without having to fight over it.
So there's this, it's just,
fighting is just politics by other means
and it's just inefficient, costly, brutal, devastating means.
And so that's like the deep insight.
And so I kind of wanted to say,
so I guess like what's not war?
And I mean, I don't try to belabor the definitions
because some, you know, there's reams and reams
of political science papers written on like,
what's a war, what's not a war, people disagree.
The, I just wanted to say,
where's the thing that we shouldn't be doing?
Or where's the violence that doesn't make sense?
There's a whole bunch of other violence,
including gang banging and skirmishes
and things that might make sense,
precisely because they're cheap ways of communicating
or they're not particularly costly.
Where's the thing that's just so costly
we should be trying to avoid?
It's maybe like the meta way I think about it.
All right.
Nevertheless, definitions are interesting.
So outside of the academic bickering,
every time you try to define something,
I'm a big fan of it, the process illuminates.
So the destination doesn't matter
because the moment you arrive at the definition,
you lose the power.
Yeah, one of the interesting things,
I mean, so people, if you wanna do,
some of what I do is just quantitative analysis
of conflict and if you wanna do that,
if you wanna sort of run statistics on war,
then you have to code it all up.
And then lots of people have done that.
There's four or five major data sets
where people or teams of people have over time said,
we're gonna code years of war between these groups
or within a country.
And what's interesting is how difficult
these data sets don't often agree.
You have to make all of these,
the decision gets really complicated.
Like when does the war begin, right?
Does it begin when a certain number of people
have been killed?
Did it begin?
Did it, what if there's like lots of skirmishing
and sort of little terror attacks
or a couple bombs lobbed
and then eventually turns into war?
Do we call that, do we backdate it
to like when the first act of violence started?
And then what do we do with all the times
when there was like that low scale,
low intensity violence or bombs lobbed?
And do we call those wars or maybe only
if they eventually get worse?
Like so it actually is really tricky.
And the defensive and the offensive aspect.
So everybody, Hitler in World War II,
it seems like he never attacked anybody.
He's always defending against the unjust attack
of everybody else as he's taken over the world.
So that's like information propaganda that every side
is trying to communicate to the world.
So you can't listen to necessarily information
like self report data.
You have to kind of look past that somehow.
Maybe look, especially in the modern world
as much as possible at the data.
How many bombs dropped?
How many people killed?
How the number of, the estimates of the number of troops
moved from one location to another and that kind of thing.
And the other interesting thing is there's
quantitative analysis of war.
So for example, I was looking at just war index
or people trying to measure, trying to put a number
on what wars are seen as just and not.
Oh really, I've never seen that.
It's, there's numbers behind it.
It's great.
So it's great because again,
as you do an extensive quantification of justice,
you start to think what actually contributes to our thought
that for example, World War II is a just war
and other wars are not.
A lot of it is about intent.
And some of the other factors like that you look at
which is prolonged, the degree of violence
that is necessary versus not necessary
given the greater good, some measure of the greater good
of people, all those kinds of things.
And then there's reasons for war, looking to free people
or to stop a genocide versus conquering land,
all those kinds of things.
And people try to put a number behind it.
And a lot of...
And it's based on, I mean, what I'm trying to imagine is,
I mean, suppose I wake up and, or whatever my,
suppose I think my God tells me to do something
or my God thinks that, or my moral sense thinks
that something that another group is doing is repugnant.
I'm curious, are they evaluating like the validity
of that claim or just the idea that like,
while you said it was repugnant,
you deeply believe that, therefore it's just.
I think not to be corrected on a lot of this,
but I think this is always looking at wars
after they happened.
So it's, and trying to take a global perspective
from all sort of a general survey of how people perceive.
So you're not weighing disproportionately the opinions
of the people who waged the war.
Yeah.
I mean, I kind of ended up dodging that because,
I mean, one is to just point out that wars,
actually most wars aren't necessary.
And so in the sense that there's another way
to get what you wanted.
And so on one level, there's no just war.
Now that's not true because take an example
like the US invasion of Afghanistan.
The United States has been attacked.
There's a couple bull agent, reliable evidence
that this is al Qaeda.
They're being sheltered in Afghanistan by the Taliban.
And then the Taliban, this is a bit murky.
It seems that there was an attempt to say hand him over
or else and they said, no way.
Now you can make an argument that invading
and attacking is strategically the right thing to do
in terms of sending signals to your future enemies.
Or you just, if you think it's important
to bring someone to justice, in this case al Qaeda,
then maybe that's just war or that's a just invasion.
But it hinges on the fact that the other side
just didn't do the seemingly sensible thing,
which is say, okay, we'll give them up.
And so it was completely avoidable in one sense.
But if you believe, and I think it's probably true,
if you believe that for their own ideological
and other reasons, you know,
Mullah Omar in particular and Taliban in general
decided we're not going to do this,
then now you're not left with very many good choices.
And now I didn't want to talk about is that a just war
or is that what's justice or not?
I just wanted to point out that like one side's
intransigence, if that's indeed what happened,
one side's intransigence sort of maybe compels you
to basically eliminates all of the reasonable bargains
that you could be satisfied with.
And now you're left with really no other strategic option
but to invade.
I think that's a slight oversimplification,
but I think that's like one way to describe what happened.
So your book is fascinating,
and your perspective on this is fascinating.
I'll try to sort of play devil's advocate at times
to try to get a clarity.
But the thesis is that war is costly,
usually costly for everybody.
So that's what you mean when you say nobody wants war
because you're going to,
from a game theoretical perspective, nobody wins.
And so war is essentially a breakdown of reason,
a breakdown of negotiation, of healthy communication
or healthy operation of the world.
Some kind of breakdown,
you list all kinds of ways in which it breaks down.
But there's also human beings in this mix.
And there is ideas of justice.
So for example, I don't want to,
my memory doesn't serve me well
on which wars were seen as justice
very, very few in the 20th century
of the many that have been there.
The wars that were seen as just,
first of all, the most just war is seen as World War II,
by far.
It's actually the only one that goes above a threshold
as seen as just, everything is seen as unjust.
It's less, it's like degrees of unjustness.
And I think the ones that are seen as more just
are the ones that are fast.
That you have a very specific purpose,
you communicate that purpose honestly
with the global community,
and you strike hard, fast, and you pull out.
To do sort of, it's like a rescue missions.
It's almost like policing work.
If there's somebody suffering,
you go in and stop that suffering directly, that's it.
I think World War II is seen in that way.
That there's an obvious aggressor
that is causing a lot of suffering in the world
and looking to expand the scale of that suffering.
And so you strike, I mean, given the scale,
you strike hard as hard and as fast as possible
to stop the expansion of the suffering.
And so that's kind of how they see.
I don't know if you can kind of look with this framework
that you've presented and look at Hitler and think,
well, it's not in his interest to attack Czechoslovakia,
Czechoslovakia, Poland, Britain, France,
Russia, the Soviet Union, America,
the United States of America, same with Japan.
Is it in their long term interest?
I don't know.
So for me, who cares about alleviating human suffering
in the world, yes, it seems like almost no war is just.
But it also seems somehow deeply human to fight.
And I think your book makes the case, no, it's not.
Can you try to like get at that?
Cause it seems that war, there is some,
that like drum of war seems to beat in all human hearts.
Like it's in there somewhere.
Maybe it's, maybe there's like a relic of the past
that we need to get rid of it.
It's deeply irrational.
Okay, so obviously we go to war
and obviously there's a lot of violence.
And so we have to explain something
and some of that's going to be aspects of our humanness.
So I guess what I wanted us to sort of start with,
I think it was just useful to sort of start and point out,
actually, there's really, really, really, really strong
incentives not to go to war
because it's going to be really costly.
And so all of these other human or strategic things,
all these things, the circumstantial things
that will eventually lead us to go to war
have to be pretty powerful before we go there.
And most of the time.
Sorry to interrupt.
And that's why you also describe very importantly
that war throughout human history is actually rare.
We usually avoid it.
You know, most people don't know about
the US invasion of Haiti in 1994.
I mean, a lot of people know about it,
but people just don't pay attention to it.
We're going to, you know, the history books
and school kids are going to learn about
the invasion of Afghanistan for decades and decades.
And nobody is going to put this one in the history books.
And it's because it didn't actually happen
because before the troops could land,
the person who'd taken power in a coup basically said, fine.
There's this famous story where Colin Powell goes to Haiti
to this new dictator who's refused to let a democratic
president take power and tries to convince him
to step down or else.
And he says, no, no, no, and then he shows him a video
and it's basically troop planes
and all these things taking off.
And he's like, this is not live.
This is two hours ago.
So it's a, and basically, he basically gives up right there.
So that was.
That's a powerful move.
Yeah.
I think Powell might have been one of his teachers
in like a US military college
because a lot of these military dictator trained
at some point.
So they had some, there was some personal relationships
at least between people in the US government
and this guy that they were trying to use.
The point is, and that's like what should have happened.
Like that makes sense, right?
Like, yeah, maybe I can mount an insurgency and yeah,
I'm not going to bear a lot of the costs of work
because I'm the dictator and maybe he's human
and he just wants to fight or gets angry
or it's just in his mind, whatever he's doing.
But at the end of the day, he's like,
this does not make sense.
And that's what happens most of the time
but we don't write so many books about it.
And now some political scientists go
and they count up all of the nations that could fight
because they have some dispute
and they're right next to one another, one another
or they look at the ethnic groups
that could fight with one another
because they have, there's some tension
and they're right next to one another
and then whatever, some number like 999 out of 1000
don't fight because they just find some other way.
They don't like each other
but they just loathe in peace
because that's the sensible thing to do.
And that's what we all do, we loathe in peace.
And we loathe the Soviet Union in relative peace
for decades and India loathes Pakistan in peace.
I mean, two weeks into the Russian invasion of Ukraine,
again, it was in the newspapers
but most people didn't, I think, take note,
India accidentally launched a cruise missile at Pakistan
and common suit.
So they were like, yeah, this is,
we do not wanna go to war.
This will be bad.
We'll be angry but we'll accept your explanation
that this was an accident.
And so these things find to the radar.
And so we overestimate, I think,
how likely it is the sides are gonna fight.
But then of course, things do happen.
Like Russia did invade the Ukraine
and didn't find some negotiated deal.
And so then the book is sort of about,
half the book is just sort of laying out,
actually, there's just different ways this breaks down.
And some of them are human.
Some of them are this.
I actually don't think war beats in our heart.
It does a little bit, but we're actually very cooperative.
As a species, we're deeply, deeply cooperative.
We're really, really good.
So the thing we're not, we're okay at violence
and we're okay at getting angry and vengeance
and we have principles that will sometimes lead us.
But we're actually really, really, really good at cooperation.
And so that's again, I'm not trying to write
some big optimistic book where everything's gonna be great
and we're all happy and we don't really fight.
It's more just to say, let's start, let's be like a doctor.
As a doctor, we're gonna focus on the sick, right?
I'm gonna try, I know there's sick people,
but I'm gonna recognize that the normal state is health
and that most people are healthy.
And that's gonna make me a better doctor.
And that's, I'm kind of saying the same thing.
Let's be better doctors of politics in the world
by recognizing that like the normal state is health.
And then we're gonna identify like,
what are the diseases that are causing this warfare?
So yeah, the natural state of the human body
with the immune system and all the different parts
wants to be healthy and is really damn good at being healthy.
But sometimes it breaks down.
Let's understand how it breaks down.
Yeah, exactly.
So what are the five ways that you list
that are the roots of war?
Yeah, so I mean, they're kind of like buckets.
Like there's sort of things that rhyme, right?
You know, because it's not all the same.
There's like lots of reasons to go to where there's this
great line, you know, there's a reason for every war
and a war for every reason.
And that's true.
And it's kind of overwhelming, right?
And it's overwhelming for a lot of people.
It was overwhelming for me for a lot of time.
And I think, I think one of the gifts of this,
of social science is actually people have started
to organize this for us.
And I just tried to organize it like a tiny bit better.
Buckets that rhyme.
Buckets.
Yeah, the terrible metaphor, right?
I had it metaphors.
So the idea was that like that basic instead of like
something overrides these incentives.
And I guess I was saying there's five ways
that they get overrided.
And three are, I'd call strategic.
Like they're kind of logical.
There's circumstances that, and this is,
they're sort of where strategic is strategy
is like the game theory is you could use those two things
interchangeably, but game theory is sort of making it
sound more complicated, I think than it is.
It's basically saying that there's times when this is
like the optimal choice because of circumstances.
And one of them is when the people who are deciding
don't bear those costs.
So that's, or maybe even have a private incentive
that's gonna, that's, if they don't,
if they're ignoring the cost, then maybe the costs
of war are not so material.
That's a contributing factor.
And others just, there's uncertainty and we can talk
about that, but there's just the absence of information
means that it actually, there's circumstances
where it's your best choice to attack.
There's this thing that political economists call
commitment problems, which are basically saying
there's some big power shift that you can avoid
by attacking now.
So it's like a dynamic incentive.
It's sort of saying, well, in order to keep something
from happening in the future, I can attack now.
And because of the structure of incentives,
it actually makes sense for me.
Even the words in theory, really costly,
or it is really costly nonetheless.
And then there's these sort of human things.
One's a little bit like just war.
One's sort of saying there's like ideologies
or principles or things we value that weigh against
those costs.
Like exterminating the heretical idea
or standing up for a principle might be so valuable
to me that I'm willing to use violence,
even if it's costly.
And there's nothing irrational about that.
And then the fifth bucket is all of the irrationalities,
all the passions and all of the most importantly,
I think like misperceptions, the way we get,
like we basically make wrong calculations
about whether or not war is the right decision we get.
Or we misunderstand or misjudge our enemy
or misjudge ourselves.
So if you put all those things into buckets,
how much can it be modeled in a simple game theoretic way?
And how much of it is a giant human mess?
So four of those five are really,
on some level, easy to think strategically
and model in a simple way in the sense
that any of us can do it.
We do this all the time.
You know, think of like bargaining in a market
for a carpet or something or whatever you bargained for.
You're thinking a few steps ahead
about what your opponent's going to do.
And you stake out a high, like a low price
and the seller stakes out a high price.
And you might both say, oh, I refuse to like,
I could never accept that.
And there's all this sort of cheap talk.
But you kind of understand where you're going
and it's efficient to like find a deal
and by the market, by the carpet eventually.
So we all understand this,
like game theory and the strategy, I think intuitively.
Or maybe even a closer example is like, suppose,
I don't know, you have a tenant you need to evict
or anyone normal like kind of legal,
it's not yet a legal dispute, right?
Like we just have a dispute with a neighbor
or somebody else.
Most of us don't end up going to court.
Going to court is like the war option.
It's the costly thing that just ought to be able to avoid.
We ought to be able to find something between ourselves
that doesn't require this hiring lawyers
and a long drawn out trial.
And most of the time we do, right?
And so we all understand that incentive.
And then for those five buckets,
so everything except all the irrational
and the misperceptions are really easy to model.
Then from a technical standpoint,
it's actually pretty tricky to model the misperceptions.
And I'm not a game theorist.
And so I'm more channeling my colleagues
who do this and what I know.
But it's not rocket science.
I mean, I think that's what I try to lay out in the book
is like there's all these ideas out there
that can actually help us just make sense of all these wars
and just bring some order to the more ass of reasons.
Well, to push back a lot of things in one sentence.
So first of all, rocket science is actually pretty simple.
People, I think.
I'll defer to you actually.
Well, I think it's cause unfortunately it's very,
like engineering, it's very well defined.
The problem is well defined.
The problem with humanity is it's actually complicated.
So it is true, it's not rocket science,
but it is not true.
It's easy because it's not rocket science.
But the problem, the downside of game theory
is not that it helps us make sense of the world.
It projects a simple model of the world
that brings this comfort in thinking we understand.
And sometimes that simplification
is actually getting it to core
first principles on understanding of something.
And sometimes it fools us into thinking we understand.
So for example, I mean,
mutually assured destruction is a very simple model.
And people argue all the time,
whether that's actually a good model or not.
But there's empirical fact that we're still alive
as a human civilization.
And also in the game theoretic sense,
do we model individual leaders and their relationships?
Do we, the staff, the generals,
or do we also have to model the culture, the people,
the suffering of the people, the economic frustration,
or the anger, the distrust?
Do you have to model all those things?
Do they come into play?
And sometimes, I mean, again,
we could be romanticizing those things
from a historical perspective.
But when you look at history
and you look at the way wars start,
it sometimes feels like a little bit of a misunderstanding
escalates, escalates, escalates,
and just builds on top of itself.
And all of a sudden it's an all out war.
It's the escalation with nobody hitting the brakes.
So, I mean, you're absolutely right in the sense
that it's totally possible to oversimplify these things
and take the game theory too seriously.
And some, and people who study those things
and write those models and people like me who use them,
because sometimes they make that mistake,
I think that's not the mistake
that most people make most often.
And what's actually true is I think
most people, we're actually really quick,
whether it's the US invasion of Afghanistan or Iraq,
we're really quick to blame that
on the humanness and the culture and that.
So we're really quick to say, oh, this was George W. Bush's
either desire for revenge and vengeance
or some private agenda or blood for oil.
So we're really quick to blame it on these things.
And then we're really, we tend to overlook
the strategic incentives to attack,
which I think were probably dominant.
I think those things might have been true to a degree,
but I don't think they were enough to ever bring
those wars about.
Just like, I think people are very quick
to sort of in this current invasion
to sort of talk about Putin's grand visions
of being the next Catherine the Great
or nationalist ideals and the mistakes
and the miscalculations were really quick
to sort of say, oh, that must be,
and then kind of pause or not pause,
maybe even stop there and not see
some of the strategic incentives.
And so, I guess we have to do both.
But the strategic, I guess I would say
like the war is just such a big problem
and it's just so costly that the strategic incentives
and the things that game theory has given us
are like really important in understanding
why there was so little room for negotiation and a bargain
that things like a leader's mistakes start to matter
or a leader's nationalist ideals or delusions
or vengeance actually matters,
because those do matter,
but they only matter when the capacity to find a deal
is so narrow because of the circumstances.
And so, it's sort of like saying,
like an elderly person who dies of pneumonia, right?
Pneumonia killed them, obviously,
but that's not the reason pneumonia was able to kill them.
All of the fundamentals and the circumstances
were like made them very fragile.
And that's how I think all the strategic forces
make that situation fragile and then the miscalculations
and all of these things you just said,
which are so important are kind of like the pneumonia.
And let's sort of, let's pay attention to both.
And you're saying that people don't,
disproportionately pay attention to the...
It's hard.
I mean, it wasn't...
It took me a long time to learn to recognize them.
And it takes many people, you know,
it took, and it took generations of social scientists
years and years to figure some of this out
and to sort of help people understand it
and clarify concepts.
So it's not, it's just not that easy.
No, it's not hard.
I think it's possible to,
just as I was taught a lot of the stuff I write in the book
in graduate school or from reading,
and it's possible to communicate and learn this stuff,
but it's still really hard.
And so that's kind of what I was trying to do
is like close that gap and just make it,
help people recognize these things in the wild.
Before we zoom back out,
let me at a high level first ask,
what are your thoughts on the ongoing war in Ukraine?
How do you analyze it within your framework about war?
A Russian colleague of mine,
Konstantin Sonin tells this story
about a visiting Ukrainian professor
who's at the university
and one night he's walking down the street
and he's talking on two cell phones at once for some reason
and a mugger stops him and demands the phones.
And it's sort of like dead panway Konstantin says,
and because he was Ukrainian, he decided to fight.
And I think that's a little bit like what happened.
Most of us in that situation
would hand over our cell phones.
And so in this situation, Putin's like the mugger
and the Ukrainian people are being asked to hand over this thing
and they're saying, no, we're not gonna hand this over.
And the fact is, most people do.
Most people faced with a superpower or a tyrant
or an autocrat or a murderous warlord
who says hand this over, they hand it over.
And that's why there are so many unequal
imperial relationships in the world.
That's what empire is.
Empire is successive people saying, fine,
we'll give up some degree of freedom or sovereignty
because you're too powerful.
And the Ukrainians said, no way.
This is just too precious.
And so I said one of those buckets
where there's a set of values.
There's something that we value
that is so valuable to us and important.
Sometimes it's terrible.
Sometimes it's the extermination of another people,
but sometimes it's something noble,
like liberty or refusal to part with sovereignty.
And in those circumstances, people will decide,
I will endure the costs.
They probably, I mean, I think they knew
what they were probably risking.
And so to me, that's not to blame the Ukrainians
any more than I would blame Americans
for the American Revolution.
It's actually a very similar story.
You had a tyrannical, militarily superior,
pretty non democratic entity come and say,
you're gonna have partial sovereignty.
And Americans for ideological reasons said, no way.
And that, people like Bernard Bale and other historians,
that's like the dominant story of the American Revolution.
It wasn't the ideological origins
just attachment to this idea of liberty.
And so I start, now there's lots of other reasons
I think why this happened.
But I think for me, it starts with
Ukrainians failing to make that sensible, quote unquote,
rational deal that says we should relinquish
some of our sovereignty because Russia
is more powerful than we are.
So there's a very clinical look at the war.
Meaning there is a man in a country,
Vladimir Putin, that makes a claim on a land,
builds up troops and invades.
Yeah.
The way to avoid suffering there
and the way to avoid death and the way to avoid war
is to back down and basically let,
there's a list of interests he provides
and you go along with that.
That's when the goal is to avoid war.
Now let's do some other calculus.
Let's think about Britain.
So France fought Hitler, but did not fight very hard.
Portugal, there's a lot of stories of countries like this.
And there is Winston motherfucking Churchill.
He's one of the rare humans in history
who had that we shall fight on the beaches.
It made no sense.
Hitler did not say he's going to destroy Britain.
He seemed to show respect for Britain.
He wanted to keep the British Empire.
It made total sense, it was obvious
that Britain was going to lose
if Hitler goes all in on Britain
as it seemed like he was going to.
And yet Winston Churchill said a big FU.
Yeah.
Similar thing, Zelensky and the Ukrainian people
said FU in the same kind of way.
So I think we're saying the same things.
I'm being more clinical about it.
Well, I'm trying to understand, and we won't know this,
but which path minimizes human suffering in the long term?
Well, on the eve of the war,
Ukraine was poor in a per person term
since it was in 1990.
The economy is just completely stagnated.
In Russia, meanwhile, like many other parts of the region,
it sort of has boomed to a degree.
I mean, certainly because of oil and gas,
but also for a variety of other reasons,
and Putin's consolidated political control.
And from a very cold, blooded and calculated point of view,
I think one way Putin and Russia could look at this,
it says, look, we were temporarily weak
after the fall of the Iron Curtain.
And the rest in the West basically took advantage of that,
like Bravo, you pulled it off,
you basically crept democracy and capitalism,
all these things right up to our border.
And now we have regained some of our strength.
We've consolidated political control,
we've caled our people, we have a stronger economy,
and we somehow got Germany and other European nations
to give up energy independence,
and actually just we've got an enormous amount
of leverage over you.
And now we wanna roll back some of your success
because we were powerful enough to demand it.
And you've been taking advantage of the situation,
which is maybe a fair impartial analysis.
And in the West, but more specifically Ukraine said,
but that's a price too high, which I totally respect.
I would maybe I'd like to think I'd make that same decision,
but that's the answer.
If the answer is why would they fight if it's so costly?
Why not find a deal?
It's because they weren't willing to give Russia
the thing that their power said they quote unquote deserve.
Just like Americans said to the Britain,
yeah, of course we ought to accept semi sovereignty,
but we refuse and we'd rather injure a bloody fight
that we might lose than take this.
And so you need some of these other five buckets.
You need them to understand the situation.
You need to sort of, there are other things going on,
but I do think it's fundamental
that this noble intransigence is a big part of it.
Well, let me just say a few things if it's okay.
So your analysis is clear and objective.
My analysis isn't either clear nor objective.
First, I've been going through a lot.
I'm a different man over the past four or five weeks
than I was before.
I in general have come to,
there's anger, I've come to despise leaders in general
because leaders wage war
and the people pay the price for that war.
Let me just say on this point of standing up
to an invader that I am half Ukrainian, half Russian,
that I'm proud of the Ukrainian people.
Whatever the sacrifices, whatever the scale of pain,
standing up, there's something in me that's proud.
Maybe that's, maybe that's whatever the fuck that is.
Maybe that blood runs in me.
I love the Ukrainian people, love the Russian people.
And whatever that fight is,
whatever that suffering is, the millions of refugees,
whatever this war is, the dictators come to power
and their power falls.
I just love that that spirit burns bright still.
And I do, maybe I'm wrong in this,
do see Ukrainian and Russian people as one people
in a way that's not just cultural, geopolitical,
but just given the history.
I think about the same kind of fighting
when Hitler with all of his forces chose
to invade the Soviet Union, Operation Barbarossa.
When he went and that Russian winter,
and a lot of people, and that pisses me off
because if you know your history,
it's not the winter that stopped Hitler,
it's the Red Army, it's the people
that refused to back down, they fought proudly.
That pride, that's something.
That's the human spirit.
That's in war, war is hell,
but it really pushes people to stand
for the things they believe in.
It's the William Wallace speech from Braveheart.
I think about this a lot.
That does not fit into your framework.
No, no, no, I'm gonna disagree.
I think it totally fits in and it's this,
there's nothing irrational about what we believe,
especially those principles which we hold the most dear.
I'm merely trying to say that there's a calculus,
there's one calculus over here that says,
Russia's more powerful than it was 20 years ago
and even 10 years ago and Ukraine is not,
and it's asking for something,
and there's an incentive to give that up.
That's obvious, there's an incentive to comply.
But my understanding is many of these post Soviet republics
have appeased, which is what we call compromise
when we disagree with it.
They've, all of these other peoples
in the Russian sphere of influence have not stood up.
And Russians, many Russians have tried to stand up
and they've been beaten down.
And now people have, we'll see,
but people have not been standing up very much.
And so lots of people are cowed and lots of people
have appeased and lots of people hear that speech
and think I would like to do that, but don't.
And so, and my point is that, sadly,
we live in a world where a lot of people
get stepped on by tyrants and empire and whatnot
and don't rise up.
And so, I think we could admire,
especially when they stand up for these reasons.
And I think we can admire Churchill for that reason.
I think we could, that's why we admire
the leaders of the American revolution and so on.
But it doesn't always happen.
And I don't actually know why,
but I don't think it's irrational.
I think it's just, it's something, it's about
a set of values and it's hard to predict.
And it was hard for,
Putin might not have been out of line
and thinking just like everybody else
in my sphere of influence, they're gonna roll over too.
And I should mention, because we haven't,
that a lot of this calculation,
from an objective point of view,
you have to include United States and NATO
into the pressure they apply into the region.
That said, I care little about leaders
that do cruel things onto the world.
They lead to a lot of suffering,
but I still believe that the Russian people
and the Ukrainian people are great people that stand up
and I admire people that stand up
and are willing to give their life.
And I think Russian people are very much that too,
especially when the enemy is coming for your home
over the hill.
Sometimes standing up to an authoritarian regime
is difficult because you don't know,
it's not a monster that's attacking your home directly.
It's kind of like the boiling of a lobster
or something like that.
It's a slow control of your mind and the population.
And our minds get controlled even in the West
by the media, by the narratives.
It's very difficult to wake up one day
and to realize sort of what people call red pilled,
is to see that they're,
maybe the thing I've been told all my life is not true.
And at every level,
it's a thing very difficult to do in North Korea.
The more authoritarian the regime,
the more difficult it is to see.
Maybe this idea that I believe
that I was willing to die for is actually evil.
It's very difficult to do for Americans,
for Russians, for Ukrainians, for Chinese,
for Indians, for Pakistanis, for everybody.
I think thinking about this Ukrainian,
whether you want to call it nobility
or in transigence or whatever is key.
I think the authoritarianness of Russia
and Putin's control or the control of his cabal
is the other thing I would really point to
is what's going on here.
And if you ask me like big picture,
what do I think is the fundamental cause
of most violence in the world?
I think it's unaccountable power.
I think, in fact, for me,
an unaccountable power is the source of underdevelopment.
It's the source of pain and suffering.
It's the source of warfare.
It's basically the root source of most of our problems.
And in this particular case,
it's also one of our buckets
in the sense that like why, what is it
that why did Russia ask these things?
Like, well, it was democracy in Ukraine
a threat to an average Russian?
No, was capitalism, is NATO, is whatever,
is this a threat to average Russians?
No, it's a threat to the apparatus
of political control and economic control
that Putin and Kronys and this sort of group of people
that rule this elite in Russia, it was a threat to them.
And so they had to ask the Ukraine to be neutral
or to give up NATO or to have a puppet government
or whatever they were seeking to achieve
and have been trying to achieve through other means
for decades, right?
They've been trying to undermine these things
without invasion.
And they've been doing that
because it threatens their interests.
And that's like one of these other logics of war.
It's not just that there's something
that I value so much
that I'm willing to injure the cost.
It's that there are people,
not only does this oligarchy
or whatever elite group that you wanna talk about in Russia,
not, first of all, they're not bearing some,
they're bearing some costs of war, right?
They're very, and they're certainly bearing costs
of sanctions, but they are,
they don't bear all the costs of war, obviously.
And so they're more, they're quick to use it.
But more importantly, like in some sense,
I think there's a strong argument
that they had a political incentive to invade
or at least to ask Ukraine this sort of impossible
to give up thing.
And then invade despite Ukrainian
nobility and transigence,
because they were threatened.
And so that's extremely important, I think.
And so that's, those two things in concert
make this a very fragile situation.
That's, I think, why we ended up
is go not all the way, but a long way to understanding.
Now you could layer on to that
these intangible incentives,
these other things that are valued on Putin's side.
Maybe there's a nationalist ideal.
Maybe he seeks status and glory.
Like maybe those things are all true,
and I'm sure they're true to an extent.
And that'll weigh against his costs of war as well.
But fundamentally, I think he just saw his regime
as threatened.
That's what he cares about.
And so he asked, he made this cruel list of demands.
I mean, I would say I'm just one human who the hell am I,
but I just have a lot of anger
towards the elites in general,
towards leaders in general that fail the people.
I would love to hear and to celebrate
the beautiful Russian people, the Ukrainian people,
and anyone who silences that beautiful voice of the people,
anyone in the world,
is destroying the thing that I value most about humanity.
Leaders don't matter.
They're supposed to serve the people.
This nationalist idea of a people, of a country,
is only makes any sense when you celebrate,
when you give people the freedom to show themselves,
to show themselves, to celebrate themselves.
And the thing I care most about is science
and the silencing of voices in the scientific community,
the silencing of voices period.
Fuck any leader that silences that human spirit.
There's something about this.
It's like, whenever I look at World War II,
whenever I look at wars, it does seem very irrational
to fight, but man, does it seem somehow deeply human
when the people stand up and fight?
There's something that, if, you know,
we talked about progress,
that feels like how progress is made,
the people that stand and fight.
So let me read the Churchill speech.
It's such, it's so proud that we humans can stand up
to evil when the time is right.
I guess here's the thing though,
think of what's happening in Xinjiang and China.
We have appeased China.
We've basically said you can just do really, really,
really horrible things in this region.
And we're, you're too powerful for us
to do anything about it and it's not worth it.
And there's nobody standing up and making a Churchill speech
or the Braveheart speech about standing up for people
of Xinjiang when what's happening is on, you know,
in that realm of what was happening in Europe.
And that's happening in a lot of places.
And then when we, when there is a willingness to stand up,
people, there's a lot of opposition to those, you know,
so there were a lot of reasons for the invasion of Iraq.
For some, it was humanitarian thing,
like Saddam Hussein was one of the worst tyrants
of the 20th century.
He was just doing some really horrible things.
You know, he'd invaded Kuwait.
He'd, you know, committed domestic,
attempted domestic genocide and all sorts of repression.
And it was probably a mistake to invade in spite.
So it's important not just to select on the cases
where we stood up and to select on the cases
where that ended up working out in the sense of victory, right?
It's important to sort of try to judge, not judge,
but just try to understand these things
in the context of all the times we didn't give that speech
or when we did and then it just went sideways.
Well, that's why it's powerful
when you're willing to give your life for your principles
because most of the time you get neither the principles
nor the life, you die, but that's why it's powerful.
We shall go on to the end.
We shall fight in France.
We shall fight on the seas and the oceans.
We shall fight with growing confidence
and growing strength in the air.
We shall defend our island, whatever the cost may be.
We shall fight on the beaches.
We shall fight on the landing grounds.
We shall fight in the fields and in the streets.
We shall fight in the hills.
We shall never surrender.
This is before Hitler had any major loss to anybody.
That was a terrifying armada coming your way.
We shall never surrender.
I just want to give props.
I want to give my respect as a human being to Churchill,
to the British people for standing up,
to the Ukrainian people for standing up,
and to the Russian people.
These are great people that throughout history
have stood up to evil.
Let me ask you this, because you quote Sun Tzu
in the art of war.
There's no instance of a country having benefited
from prolonged warfare.
This is the main thesis.
Can we just linger on this?
Since leaders wage war and people pay the price,
when we say that there's no reason to do prolonged war,
is it possible to have a reason for the leaders
if they disregard the price?
If they have a different objective function
or utility function that measures the price
that's paid for war, is that one explanation
of why war happens?
Is the leaders just have a different calculus
than other humans?
I mean, I think this links us back
to what we were talking about earlier about just war.
Is in some sense, just war is saying
that in spite of the costs, our enemy has done something.
Our opponent has refused to compromise
on something that we find essential,
and is demanding that we compromise
in a way that's completely repugnant.
And therefore, we're going to go to war
despite these material costs and these human costs.
So that, and then that principle that you go to war on
is in the eye of the holder.
And I mean, I think liberty and sovereignty,
I think we can understand and sympathize with,
and maybe that's just a universe,
maybe that's the greatest cause of just war,
but other people make that could go to war
for something considerably less,
a principle that's considerably less noble, right?
Which is what Hitler was doing.
That's an explanation.
So that's a whole class of explanations
that helps us understand that the compromise
that was on the table, given the relative balance of power,
was just repugnant at least to one side,
if not that there's something they're unwilling to part with.
That's, and then you get to the leaders.
Well, what happens when what the leaders want,
what happens when the leaders are detached
from the interests of their groups,
which has been true for basically most of human history.
There's a narrow slice of societies
in the big scheme of things
that have been accountable to their people.
A lot of them exist today,
where to some degree,
they're channeling the interests of their group, right?
So the Ukrainian politicians didn't concede
to these cool Russian demands,
because even if they had,
it would have been political suicide,
because it seemed, or I think I don't,
it seems that the Ukrainians would have just rejected this.
So they were in some sense channeling
the values of the broader population,
even if they, I don't know what was going on,
even if they didn't share those principles,
they self interestedly followed them.
Probably they shared them,
but I'm just saying that even if they didn't,
they wouldn't compromise.
Occasionally get the reverse,
which is where the leaders are not accountable.
And now they have some value, which could be glory.
I mean, this is the story of the kings
and to some lesser extent, the queens of Europe
for hundreds of years,
was it was basically a contest
and it was the, more was the sport of kings.
And to some extent,
they were just seeking status through violent competition.
And they paid a lot, a big price out of the royal purse,
but they didn't pay most of the suffering.
And so they were too quick to go to war.
And so that's, I think that detachment of leaders,
combined with, you know, you mingle it with this,
that one bucket, that uncheckedness,
and you mingle that with the fact
that leaders might have one of these values,
noble or otherwise, that carry them to war,
combined to explain a good number of conflicts as well.
And that's a good illustration
of why I think like autocracy and unaccountable power
is I could make that story for all of the things,
all five buckets, they're all,
we're all more susceptible to these things,
to all five of these things
when leaders are not accountable to the people
and their group.
And that's what makes it like the meta,
for me, the meta cause of conflict in all of human history
and sadly today.
Does the will to power play into this, the desire for power?
Like that's a human thing again in the calculation
that shall we put that in the misperceptions bucket?
Or is it, is misperceptions essentially
about interaction between humans
and power is more about the thing you feel in your heart
when you're alone as a leader?
You know, I said there were three strategic reasons
like the unchecked leaders,
the commitment problems, uncertainty.
There are two sort of more psychological
and I called them intangible incentives and misperceptions.
The way that like a game theorist
or the way that behavioral economists would think
about those two was just to say preferences.
And then erroneous beliefs and mistakes is like,
so the preferences are our preferences, right?
And so utility functions, whatever we want to call it,
like there's not, that's why I wouldn't call them
a misperception or rationality.
We want, we like what we like.
If we like power, if we like relative status,
if we like, if we like our racial purity,
if we like our liberty, if we like whatever it is
that we have convinced ourselves we value.
Maybe you fell in love with the rival queen, a king.
Exactly.
When I said it was a big bucket full of stuff that rhymes,
like that's a pretty messy bucket.
Like there's a lot of different stuff in there.
And I'm just trying to say like, let's be clear
that just about the shared logic of these things
is maybe just, you know, they're really dissimilar,
but let's be clear about the shared logic.
And if it were true that deep down
we were aggressive people who just liked violence
and enjoyed the blood or some percentage of us do,
that would be there too.
And so I just want to say that's,
but you know, we're really quick to recognize those, right?
When we diagnose a war as an armchair analyst
or as a journalist or something, we really jump to those.
We don't need a lot of help to like see those happening.
So we probably put a little bit too much emphasis on them.
It's maybe the only thing that I would caution
because the others are more subtle
and they're often there and they contribute.
So just to link on something you said before,
would it be accurate to say when the leaders become detached
from the opinion of the people,
is that's more likely to lead to war?
So.
And mechanically, it's just they're gonna bear fewer costs.
So it's gonna basically narrow the set of deals
that they're gonna be willing to accept instead of violence.
At the same time, most of the time it's not enough
because the leaders still bear a lot of costs of war.
You could be deposed, you could be killed,
you could be tried, and the public purse
is going to be empty.
I mean, that's like the one story throughout history
is that at the end of the day,
your regime is broke as a result of war.
And so you still internalize that a little bit.
If I had to say like, you know, in my three buckets
or through my buckets so far,
I sort of started with like Ukrainian and Transigence.
And then I jumped and then I said the essential,
then you really have to understand Russian autocracy
just to understand why they would ask something so cool.
But I mean, I think the uncertainty
is really important here as well.
Like if you think of it, like think of all of the things,
the way this has played out,
and just in some ways how many ways we've been surprised.
We've been surprised by the unity
and the coherence of the West and the sanctions.
That sort of, what's happened is it was
in the realm of possibility,
but it was sort of like the best case scenario
from the perspective of the West
and the worst case scenario for the Russians.
The second thing is just the pluckiness
and the effectiveness and the intransigence
and the nobility of this Ukrainian resistance.
That's again, was within the realm of possibility,
but wasn't necessarily the likely thing, right?
It was again, maybe the worst realization for Russia,
the best realization in some sense for,
in terms of revealed strength and resolve.
And then the other thing that's been revealed
is just how, like the corruption and ineptitude
and problems on the Russian military side.
Again, within the realm of possibility,
maybe people who really knew the Russian military
are less surprised than the rest of us,
but also one of the worst possible draws to Russia.
And so, Putin asking this terrible price
and expecting Ukraine to roll over,
or the West to roll over at least to a degree,
was based on like a different set of probability.
It was based on just expecting something
in the middle of the probability distribution
and not all these different tail events.
And so the fact that the world's so uncertain
and the fact that Putin can come
with a different set of expectations
than the Ukrainians and the West
and all these players can just have a hard time agreeing
on just what the facts are,
because we live in an uncertain world.
Everyone's quick to say, oh, we miscalculated.
Well, I'm not, I don't know if you miscalculated.
I think he just, he got a really bad draw
on in terms of what the realized outcomes are here.
And so, I mean, good for everybody else in some sense,
except the fact that it's involving a lot of violence
is the tragedy.
Well, there's also economic pain,
not just for the Russian people and the Ukrainian people,
but for the whole world.
So, you could talk about things that we are surprised
from an analysis perspective of small victories here or there,
but I think it's universally true
that everybody loses once again in this war.
Right, and so the question is just like, when does it,
why did Russia choose to invade
when Ukraine didn't give this up?
Well, Russia anticipated that it would be able to seize
what it wanted, the available bargain that it deserved
quote unquote, based on its power.
In the world, it wasn't getting.
And so, it thought it could take that.
And the uncertainty around that made it potentially
more likely that he would choose to do this.
But in particular, one of the other things that I think
is probably less important in this context,
but still plays a role, but less important than many wars,
is the fact that it's really hard to resolve that uncertainty.
Right, in theory, Ukraine should be able to say,
look, this is exactly how resolved we are, we're super resolved.
And your military is not as strong as you think it is.
You mean before the conflict begins?
Before the conflict begins.
Everybody should be like, you know what?
You lay on the table, here's my cards.
No one wants, yeah.
Here's your cards.
Exactly, like that's, as a competitor in this,
you can use that uncertainty or to your advantage.
I can try to convince you, I can bluff.
Yeah.
Right, and so anyone who's ever played poker
and bluffed or called a bluff,
that's the analogy in some ways toward,
it's not the perfect analogy.
But the uncertainty in the circumstance,
you don't have to miscalculate.
The fact that if you bluff and lose,
it wasn't that you miscalculated,
you made an optimal choice,
given the uncertainty of the situation to take a gamble.
And that was a wiser thing for you to do
than to not bluff.
And just to fold or to just not pay in that round.
And so the uncertainty of the situation
gives both sides incentives to bluff,
gives neither side an incentive to try to reveal the truth.
And then at some point, the other side says,
you know what, you say you're resolved.
You say you're not going to,
you're going to mount an uncertainty.
Well, guess what?
Every other, you know,
people on my border has folded
and you're going to fold too,
the minute the tanks roll in
and the minute the Air Force comes in,
I'm gambling that you're bluffing.
And so that inherent uncertainty of the situation
just causes a lot of short wars, actually,
because it's the sort of bluff and call dynamic that goes on.
And, you know, the thing that's worth thinking
is we might end up at a place in a few months
where the thing that Ukraine concedes
is not so far from what Russia demanded in the first place.
Russia's on it, I want a neutral,
I mean, who knows how,
it's not the ambitious thing the Russians wanted,
but if we end up in a place
where Ukraine is effectively neutral,
never joins NATO,
is not being militarily supplied by the West
and where Russia has de facto control over the East
in Crimea, if not fully recognized,
probably, who knows if they'll get ever internationally
if the Ukrainian recognized,
but effectively controls,
Russia will have accomplished
what it asked for in the first place
and both parties had to get there
through violence rather than through negotiation.
And you wouldn't need misperceptions and mistakes
and you wouldn't need Putin's delusions of glory
or whatever to get there,
you would just need the ingredients I've given so far,
which is like an unwillingness to do that without fighting
on the part of the Ukrainians,
an autocratic leadership in Russia
who would make those demands
because it's in their self interest
and then uncertainty leading them to fight.
And that, sadly, is like the best case,
that feels like the best case scenario right now,
which is the war's just five months and not five years.
Given the current situation.
Because the suffering has already happened.
It lost homes, people moving,
you know, having to see their home
and rubble and millions of people,
refugees having to escape the country
and hate flourishes versus the common humanity
as it does with war.
And on top of all of that,
if we talk from a geopolitical perspective,
the warmongers all over the world are sort of drooling.
They now have got narratives
and they got that whatever narratives,
you can go shopping for the narratives.
The United States has its narratives
for whatever geopolitical thing you want to do
in that part of the world.
That's another little malevolent interaction
between two of these buckets,
like those unchecked leaders
and those intangible incentives, those preferences,
is that unchecked leaders spend,
autocrats, whatever,
spend enormous amounts of time
trying to manipulate the values and beliefs
of their population, of their group.
And now, sometimes they do it nobly,
but Winston Churchill there was trying to,
it's not clear that Britons were ready to stand up.
There were a lot of Americans and a lot of Britons
who were like, you know what?
Hitler, not such a bad guy.
His idea is not so terrible.
I never liked those Jews anyways.
Many were thinking.
We had political leaders in the US
who were basically not pro Nazi,
but were just not anti Nazi.
And Churchill was just trying to instill
a different resolve.
He was trying to create that thing.
He was trying to create that value.
And in the American revolution it was as well.
The founding fathers, the leaders of the revolution,
it's not that everybody just woke up one morning
in the United States
and had this ideology of liberty and freedom.
Some of that was true.
It was out there in the ether,
but they had to manufacture and create it.
In a way that I think they believed and was noble,
but there's a lot of manufacturing
and creation of these values and principles
that is not noble,
and that is exactly what Hitler did so well.
The anti extremism was present throughout the world,
but the more subtle thing that I feel like
maybe more generally applicable
is this kind of pacifism.
But I think people in the United States
felt like it's not my conflict.
Why do I need to get involved with it?
And I think Churchill was fighting that.
The general apathy.
It's the apathy of rational calculus.
What are we going to gain if we fight back?
Hitler seems to be pretty reasonable.
He's not going to stop the bombing.
You're still going to maintain your sovereignty
as the great people of Britain.
Why are we fighting again?
And that's the thing that's hard to break
because you have to say,
well, you have to speak the principle.
You have to speak at some greater sort of
long term vision of history.
So it's like, yes, now it may seem like
it's a way to avoid the fight,
but you're actually just sort of putting shackles on yourself.
You're destroying the very greatness of our people
if we don't fight back.
And to think about this with the current case with Russia,
some people look at Putin's speeches
and papers he's written on Ukraine
historically being a part of Russia
and trying to deny the,
basically create all these nationalist narratives
and they think, well, Putin really believes,
and he might, Putin really believes this
and that's why he's invading.
And that might also be true
and that would contribute to
just make a peaceful bargain even harder to find.
But I suspect what's at least a minimum true
is Putin's trying to manufacture support
for an invasion in the population through propaganda.
And so he's doing on some level
the same thing that Winston Churchill was doing
in mechanical terms,
which is to try to manipulate people's references
but doing it in a sinister, malevolent, evil,
self serving way because it's really in his interest,
whereas this was anything but, right,
in the Churchill example.
The dark human thing is like,
there's moments in World War II
where Hitler's propaganda,
he began to believe his own propaganda.
It's like,
I think he probably always believed,
I think he was a sincere believer.
Well, no, no, there's,
but there's a lot of places
where there was uncertainty
and they decided to do propaganda
and that propaganda resolved the uncertainty in his own mind.
Like, so for example,
he believed until very late
that America is a weakling militarily
as an economic power and just the spirit of the people.
And like, that was part of the propaganda they're producing
and because of that propaganda,
when he became the head of the army,
he was making military actions.
He like, nonchalantly started war with America.
Well, the United States of America,
where he didn't need to at all.
He could have avoided that completely,
but he thought, eh, whatever,
they're easy.
So that's, I think that propaganda first believes second
and I think as a human being, as a dictator,
when you start to believe the lies
with which you're controlling the populace,
you become detached from this person
that's able to resolve in a very human way
the conflict in the world.
I mean, when I said the meta,
the big common factor that causes war
and over and over and over again is unaccountable power.
It's not just because it's mechanically,
like one of my five explanations is saying,
well, if you're unaccountable, you don't bear the cost of war.
You might have private incentives.
So yes, bargains are harder to find,
but it leads to all these nasty interactions.
So earlier I said there's this interaction
between the values and the unchecked leaders
because those idiosyncratic values of your leader
become more important when they're unchecked.
But the uncertainty point you just made is like a deep point.
It's to say actually that like the fundamental problem
that all autocrats have is an information problem
because nobody wants to give them the right information.
And they have very few ways to aggregate information
if they're not popular, right?
And so there's a whole cottage industry of political science
sort of talking about why autocrats love fixed elections
and why they love Twitter and why they actually like it
in the controlled ways.
It solves an information problem.
Like that's your cru...
If you're like Xi Jinping or Vladimir Putin,
you need to solve an information problem
just to avoid having a rebellion on your hands
in your own country every day because uncertainty
kind of gets magnified and you get all this distorted information
in this apparatus of control.
And so that's like another nasty interaction
between uncertainty and unchecked leaders
is you end up in this situation
where you're getting bad information
and it's not that you don't...
You believe your own lies.
It's just that you never...
You sort of believe...
You're sort of averaging what you believe
over the available information
and you don't realize that it's such a distorted
and biased information source.
One of the other things about this time,
that was a surprise to me,
in the fog of uncertainty,
how sort of seemingly likely nuclear war became.
Not likely, but how it...
Less unlikely than before.
Exactly.
That's a better way to say it.
It started to take a random stroll away
from zero percent probability
into this kind of land of maybe like...
It's hard to know, but it's like,
oh, wow, we're actually normally talking about this
as if this is part of the calculus,
part of the options.
But before we talk about nuclear war,
because I'm going to need a drink,
do you need to go to the bathroom?
Sure, I'll take a break.
So back to nuclear war.
What do you think about this,
that people were nonchalantly speaking about nuclear wars
if it doesn't lead to the potential annihilation
of the human species?
What are the chances that our world
sends it to nuclear war within your framework?
You wore many hats.
One is sort of the...
Analyst, right?
And then one is a human.
What do you think are the chances
we get to see nuclear war in the century?
Well, you know, the doomsday,
the official doomsday clock for nuclear warfare
sits in the lobby of my building.
The bulletin of atomic scientists
sort of shares a building with us.
So it's always there every day.
Can you describe what the doomsday clock is?
The bulletin of atomic scientists.
It's something that this group of physicists
sort of said to sort of mark
just how close we are to nuclear catastrophe,
and they started it decades ago.
And it's a clock,
and it's sort of how close are we to midnight,
where midnight is nuclear armageddon
or the destruction of humanity.
And it's been sitting...
I mean, it's actually...
It hasn't moved as close to...
It hasn't moved as close to midnight
in the last few weeks as it probably should have,
because it was already so close.
There's actually limited room for it to move
for a bunch of other reasons.
I think it's...
There's a whole political thing that once...
It's really hard.
It's really easy to move it closer.
And it's really hard if you're the person
in charge of that clock to move it away,
because that's always very controversial.
So it always sits there,
but it forces you to think about it
a little bit every day.
And I admit I was nonchalant about it
until recently in a way that many other people were.
I still think the risk is very low,
but kind of for the reasons we've talked to,
it's just so unimaginably costly
that nobody wants to go that route.
So it's like the extreme version of my whole argument
was why we most of the time don't fight
is because it's just so damn costly.
And so this is...
That's the incentive not to use this.
And if they do use it,
that's the incentive to use it in a very restrained way.
But that's not a lot of...
But because we know we do go to war
and there's all these things that interfere with it,
including miscalculation and all of these human foibles.
And several of those nuclear powers
are not accountable leaders.
I think we have to be a lot more worried
than many of us were very recently.
I pointed out earlier,
the whole reason we're in this mess is
because the only people who have this private interest
in having Ukraine give up its freedom
is this Russian cabal and elite that gets their power
and is preserved and is threatened by Ukrainian democracy.
How far would they go to hang onto power
when push came to shove
is I think the thing that worries me the most
and is plainly what worries most people
about the risk of nuclear war.
I think at what point does that unchecked leadership
decide that this is worth it,
especially if they can emerge from the rubble still on top?
I don't know.
And I don't know that any of us
have really fully thought through all of that calculus
and what's going on.
Very recently, around the anniversary of January 6th,
there were a lot of questions about,
was the United States going to have another civil war?
On the one hand, I think it's almost unimaginable.
Sort of like in the same way I think that a nuclear war
and complete Armageddon is unimaginable.
But I remember something that...
When both of those questions get asked,
I remember something I was in the audience
of listening to some great economists speak about
20 years ago about the risk of an Argentina style
financial meltdown of the United States.
What's the total financial collapse?
And they said, you know what, the risk is vanishingly small.
But that's terrifying because until recently,
the answer was zero.
And so the fact that it's not zero
should deeply, deeply scare us all.
And we should devote a lot of energy to making it zero again.
And that's how I feel about the risk of a civil war in the US.
And that's how I feel about the risk of nuclear war.
It's higher than it used to be,
and that should terrify us all.
To me what terrifies me is that all this kind of stuff
seems to happen overnight, like super quick
and it escalates super quick when it happens.
So it's not like...
I don't know what I imagined,
but it just happens like if a nuclear war happened,
it would be something like a plane,
like in this case with Ukraine,
a NATO plane shut down over some piece of land
by the Russian forces,
or so the narrative would go,
but it doesn't even matter what's true or not
in order to spark the first moment of escalation.
And then it just goes, goes, goes.
Well, I think that happens sometimes.
I mean, again, it's this thing that, you know,
social scientists call it selection on the dependent variable.
There's all these times when that didn't happen,
when it escalated one step and then people paused,
or escalated two steps and people said,
whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
And so we remember the times when it went boom, boom, boom,
boom, boom, boom, boom, boom,
and then the really terrible thing happened.
But that, fortunately, that's not, you know,
I start off the book with an example of a gang war
that didn't happen in Medellin, Colombia,
which is my day job is actually studying conflict
and gangs and violence of these other kinds of groups,
also very sinister.
And most of the time they don't fight
and that escalation doesn't happen.
So the escalation does happen quickly sometimes,
except when it doesn't.
So we remember the ones when it does.
It's really important to think about all that.
I remember talking to, I think Elon Musk on his podcast,
I was sort of like talking about the horrors of war and so on.
And then he said, well, you know, like most of human history,
because I think I said like most of human history is,
had been defined by these horrible wars.
He's like, no, most of human history is just peaceful,
like farming life.
Like war, we kind of remember the wars,
but most of human history is, you know, is life.
Yeah, and most of the competition between nations was like blood,
I would say blood thirsty without drinking that blood
in the sense that it was intense, it would loathe some.
And so a lot of the rivalry and a lot of the competition,
which is also can be problematic in its own ways, is not violent.
And most of human history is about the oppression of the majority by a few.
And their moments when they rise up and revolt,
and there's a revolution, we remember those,
but most of the time they don't.
And the story of political change and transformation and freedom
is there's a few revolutions that are violent,
but most of it is actually revolutions
without that kind of violent revolt.
Most of it is just the peaceful concession of power by elites
to a wider and wider group of people
in response to their increased economic bargaining power,
their threat that they're going to march.
So even if we want to understand something like the march of freedom
over human history, I think we can draw this same insight
that actually we don't, most of the time we don't fight,
we actually concede power.
No, you don't, the elite doesn't sort of give power to the masses right away.
They just coopt the few merchants who could threaten the whole thing
and bring them into the circle.
And then the circle gets a little bit wider and a little bit wider
until the circle is ever wide,
and maybe not ever, but in clumpuses most, if not all.
And that's like a hopeful and optimistic trend.
Yeah, if you look at the plot, if you guys could pull it up of the war throughout history,
so the rate of war throughout history does seem to be decreasing significantly
with a few spikes, and the sort of the expansion,
it's like half the world is under authoritarian regimes,
but that's been shrinking and shrinking and shrinking.
Stephen Pinker's one person, one famous scholar who brings up this hypothesis.
I mean, there's sort of two ways, there's actually two separate kinds of violence
that one where I think he's completely right,
and one where I think we're not sure, probably maybe not.
Where he's completely right, it's sort of interpersonal violence,
homicides, everyday violence has been going down, down, down, down, down, down.
That's just unambiguously, and it's mostly because we've created cultures and states
and rules and things that control that violence.
Now, the warfare between groups is that less frequent.
Well, you know, it's not clear that he's right, that there's fewer wars.
You might say that wars are more rare because they're more costly,
because our weapons are so brutal.
The cost of war go up, as the cost of war go up, not entirely,
but for the most part, that gives us an incentive not to have them.
But then when they do happen, they're doozies.
So, is Pinker right?
I hope he's right, but I don't think that officially that trend is there.
I think that we might have the same kind of levels of intergroup violence
because maybe those five fundamentals that lead to war have not fundamentally changed
and thus made us, given us a more peaceful world now than a couple hundred years ago.
That's something to think about.
So, obviously, looking at his hypothesis, looking at his data, and others like him.
But I have noticed one thing, which is the amount of pushback he gets.
That this is speaking to the general point that you made,
which is like we overemphasize the anecdotal and don't look objectively at the aggregate data as much.
There's a general cynicism about the world, and I don't even mean cynicism.
It's almost like cynicism porn or something like that,
where people just get, for some reason, they get a little bit excited
to talk about the destruction of human civilization in a weird way.
They don't really mean it, I think.
If I were to psychoanalyze their geopolitical analysis,
I think it's a kind of, I don't know, maybe relieves the mind to think about death at a global scale somehow,
and then you can go have lunch with your kids afterwards and feel a little better about the world.
I don't know what it is, but it's not very scientific.
It's very kind of personal, emotional.
So we should be careful to look at the world in that way,
because if you look broadly, there is just like you highlight,
there's a will for peace among people.
You mentioned Medellin.
By the way, how do you pronounce it, Medellin or Medellin?
Both are fine.
I think there they say Medellin, because that's kind of the accent on the double L.
But Medellin would be totally fine as well.
What lessons do you draw from the Medellin cartel, from the different gang wars in Colombia, Medellin?
What's the economics of peace and war between drug cartels?
Here's what was really insightful for me.
So I live in Chicago, and people are aware that there's a violence problem in Chicago.
It's actually not the worst American city by any stretch of the imagination for shootings,
but it's pretty bad.
And Medellin has these better, much many more and probably many better organized gangs than Chicago.
And yet the homicide rate is maybe half.
And now, I mean, there have been moments when these gangs go to war in the last 30 years,
when Medellin has become the most violent place on the planet.
But for the most part, right now, they're peaceful.
And so what's going on there?
I mean, one thing that is there's a hierarchy of organizations, so that above these recently well organized neighborhood gangs,
there's a set of more shadowy organizations that have different names.
Some people call them razones.
Some people would call them bandas, criminalis, criminal bands.
You might just call them mafias.
And there's about 17 of them, depending on how you want to count.
And they themselves have a little operating board called,
sometimes they call it the office, La Fesina, sometimes they call it La Mesa, the table.
Well, each individual one or as a group?
As a group.
So they meet and they don't meet personally all the time.
Sometimes they meet, but they consult.
A lot of the leaders of these groups are actually in prison.
And so, and they're in the same wings in prison.
They have represented.
Oh, they meet in prison.
Well, whatever, if I'm on a cell block with you, I'd be to you anyways, right?
So actually imprisoning leaders and putting them in the same cell block, but not putting them,
you know, if you get arrested here in the United States and you're a criminal leader,
and you get put in a super max prison, you cannot run your criminal empire.
It's just too difficult.
It's impossible.
There, it's possible.
And you might think, and they do, they still run their empire.
And you might think that's a bad idea, but actually cutting off the head of a criminal organization,
leading it to a bunch, leaving it to a bunch of like hotheaded young guys who are disorganized,
is not always the path to peace.
So having these guys all in the same prison patios is actually, it reduces imperfect information and uncertainty, right?
It provides a place for them to bargain.
They can talk.
And so Laofacina is like a lot of these informal meetings.
And so, you know, and they have these tools that they use to control the street gangs.
So instead of there being like 400 gangs, all sort of in this anarchic situation of competing for territory and constantly at war,
the Risones are keeping them in line and they will use sanctions.
They will, where the sanction might be, I will put a bullet in your head if you, if you don't.
It's a little more honest than the sanctions between nations.
Exactly.
But they will, but they, they will sit them down.
They'll, they'll provide, they'll help them negotiate.
They will provide commitment, I said there are these things called commitment problems where like there's some,
I have some incentive to like exterminate you, but that's going to be costly for everybody.
So I'm going to, what's the solution?
Well, I'm going to provide commitment.
I'm going to like enforce this deal.
And yeah, you don't like this deal now because you could take advantage of your situation and wage war,
but I'm going to give you a counter incentive.
And, and, and so they keep the peace.
And so, and it's a little bit, so they're a little bit like the UN Security Council and peacekeeping forces and sanctions regimes.
It's like the same kinds of tools, the same parallels and, and they're imperfect.
They don't always work that well and they're unequal, right?
Cause it's not like they're pursuing this in the interests of like democratic blah, blah, blah.
But it kind of works until it doesn't.
And, and 10 years ago in, you know, in the mid 1990s, there were wars and this breaks down.
And I, it kind of gave me this perspective on the international institutions and all the tools we've built that we do the same things, right?
Sanctions are designed to make unchecked leaders face the cost of war.
It's a solution to one of the five problems, right?
And mediators are a solution to uncertainty and international institutions that can enforce a peace and agreement are a solution to commitment problems.
And all of these things can be solutions to these intangible incentives, like these preferences for whatever you value and miscalculations
because they will punish you for your miscalculation or they will get a mediator to sort of help you realize why you're miscalculating.
So, so they're doing all these things and it made me realize that the comparison to the UN Security Council and all our tools is actually a pretty good one
because those are pretty unequal too.
And those are pretty imperfect.
Like that's, you know, it's, there's these, we have five nations with a veto on the Security Council and a lot of unequal power
and they're manipulating this in their own self interest or their group's interests.
So, so anyway, so it's actually the some of the things that work in Medellin and why they work help give me a lot of perspective on what works in the international arena
and why we have some of the problems we have is like.
So there's not in some deep way, there's not a fundamental difference between those 17 mafia groups and the UN Security Council.
The UN Security Council.
We're such a funny descendant of apes.
Put on suits.
I'm sure there were different, they have different cultural garbs that they wear.
What are your thoughts?
I mean, that's the sense I got from Pablo Escobar and Jorge Ochoa who founded the Medellin cartel is like having spoken with people.
And as podcast, Dr. Roger Reeves, who was a drug transporter, it seems like there, it seems like it was, I don't know the right term, but it was very kind of professional and calm.
It didn't have a sense of danger to it.
Like it's negotiating.
So like the danger is always on the table as a threat as part of the calculation, but you're using that threat in order to deescalate in order to have peace.
Everybody is interested in peace.
So something that happened last year, we were a little bit able to watch in real time because we had a few contacts.
We've been meeting and talking to a lot of these leaders in prison and a bit outside of prison.
Many of them will talk to us.
And so they're the homicide rate.
I mentioned homicide rate and medicines, maybe a two thirds or half of the Chicago level.
It had been climbing.
Some of these street level gangs were starting to fight.
Maybe at sort of the, on some level, it seems that like maybe some of those prison leaders were like saying, well, you know, we're actually not sure how strong these guys are.
Let's let them fight just to test it out.
Let's have these skirmishes, right?
It wasn't prolonged warfare.
It was like, let's just sort of feel out how strong everybody is because then we'll be able to reapportion the drug corners and stuff accordingly.
So they're kind of feeling each other out through fighting and the homicide rate doubled and then it increased by the same amount again.
So it was approaching something that might get out of control, which wasn't in anybody's interest.
It wasn't in the government's interest.
It wasn't in their interest.
And so then magically all of these leaders in these patios, right, different prisons, they're spread out around a bunch of prisons.
Everybody gets transferred to a new prison on the same day, which means they all get to be in the same holding area for three days before they're all moved elsewhere.
So the government had a role in this.
And then somebody who's like a trusted mediator on the criminal side gets himself arrested.
It happens to be put in the same spot.
And a week later, the homicide rate is 30% of what it was is back to its normal model.
Unfortunately, not zero, right?
But it's back to where it was because it didn't make sense to have a war.
And everybody, government, mafia leaders, everybody sort of like, they figured out a way to sort of bargain their way to peace.
Can I say this almost like a tangent, but you mentioned you got a chance potentially to talk to a few folks, someone in prison, someone or not.
Is it productive?
Is it interesting?
Maybe by way of advice, do you have ideas about talking to people who are actively criminals?
Yeah, it really depends on the situation.
So like the first time I worked in a conflicted place was in northern Uganda in the maybe the last couple years of a long running war.
So this would have been 2004, 2005.
This is a small East African country.
And the north of the country had been engulfed in, think of it as like a 20 year low level insurgency run by a self proclaimed messiah
who wasn't that popular and no one joined his movement.
So he would kidnap kids.
And so the, I never, I could talk to people who are, who'd come back from being there.
I never once, if I'd wanted to, and I was writing about that armed group, I never talked to anybody who was an active member of that armed group was quite rare.
It wouldn't have been easier safe.
And that's sometimes true.
I'm starting to do some work in Mexico, probably, and I'm not going to be talking to any criminal.
They'll kill people.
And you say you're not going to talk to them and they'll kill people?
Which people?
So, I mean, journalists are routinely killed for knowing too much in Mexico.
There's no, there's no compunctions about killing them and there's no consequences.
Who do you, who kills a journalist?
It's not the main people that you spoke with.
It's there.
Is it their lackeys or is it rival?
No, so, so, so, um, gangs.
This is true of a Chicago gang and this is true of a Medellin gang.
It's probably true of a Mexico gang is like, you might have your group of 30 people.
One or two of them might be shooters.
Most people don't shoot.
Most people don't like to do that.
Or you don't even have any of those people in your group because you're trying to run a business.
You don't need any shooters.
You can just hire a killer when you need them on contract.
And so, if somebody's asking questions and you don't want them to ask questions
or you think they know too much in a way that threatens you
and it's cheap for you and you have no personal compunctions
and you can, then you can put a contract out on them and they'll be killed.
That doesn't happen in Colombia.
It doesn't happen in Chicago.
I don't know.
There's lots of reasons for that.
I can't say exactly why.
I think one reason is like, they know what'll happen is that there'll be consequences
that the government will crack down and make them pay and so they don't do it.
And that is not what happened in Mexico.
They won't kill like a deagent.
They know that the US has made it clear.
You kill one of our agents, we will make you pay.
And so, they're very careful to minimize death of an American,
but you kill journalists and nobody comes after them or is able to come after them.
And so, they've realized they can get away with this
and that seems to be the equilibrium there.
That's my initial sense from...
But we spent a lot of time before we started talking to criminals.
We spent a year trying to figure out what was safe before we actually...
And failing.
We kept...
There were lots of safe things to do.
It was also really hard to figure out how to talk to people in these organizations
and we failed 40 times before we figured out a way to actually access people.
Is it worth it talking to them if you figure out...
Because it's not never going to be safe.
It's going to be when you estimate that there's some low level of risk.
What's the benefit as a researcher, as a scholar of humans?
Yeah.
So, I actually don't think...
Let's compare it to something...
Okay, I'm in Austin for the first time and I'm walking around
and there's all these people buzzing around on these scooters without helmets.
We need to definitely interview them and say what the hell is wrong with you.
So, nothing I have ever done in my entire career is as risky as that.
That's a nice way to compare journalism in a war zone.
Yeah, there are some war zones.
I worked in Northern Uganda and I worked in Liberia and I work now in Medellin
and I'm starting to work in Mexico.
Both those particular places and then the things I did in those places
where I spent a lot of time making sure that what I was doing was not unduly risky.
Todd, could you pull up a picture of a person on a scooter in Austin
so we can just compare this absurd situation where I doubt it's the riskiest thing
because now we have to look at the data.
I understand the point you're making, but...
Well...
So, I'm not trying to say there's zero risk.
I think there's like a calculated risk
and I think you become good at...
You work at becoming good at being able to assess these risks
and know who can help you assess these risks.
Yeah, I think there's another aspect to it too.
When you're riding a scooter, once you're done with the scooter, the risk has disappeared.
There's something lingering when you have to look over your shoulder,
potential for the rest of your life as you accumulate all these conversations.
Yeah, I've chosen, but I've also advised my students
and I wouldn't go and do this with an armed group that would think I knew too much and therefore...
Some people do that.
Some journalists, I think, are very brave and take risks and do that
and good for them and I'm happy they do that.
I don't personally do that.
So, these guys are very...
I mean, in Medellin, it's a business.
They're selling local drugs
and they are laundering money for the big cartels
and they are shaking down businesses for money or selling services in some cases
and they make a lot of money.
It's a business and they're in prison.
So, they can talk about most of what they want to talk about
because there's no double jeopardy.
They've been incarcerated for it and you're just talking shop
and they're just... So, it's worth it, I think, because the risk is very low
but if you actually want to weaken these organizations
and they're extremely powerful, they're extremely big facet of life in a lot of cities
in the Americas in particular, including in some American cities,
if you want to understand how to weaken these groups over time,
you have to understand how their business works
and imagine you were made like whatever the oils are of the United States
or maybe you're in charge of the finance industry.
You're the regulator for oil and energy or for finance
and then you get in the job and someone says...
and then you're like, well, how many firms are there
and what do they sell and what are the prices?
And then we're just like, well, we don't really know.
You would not be a very good regulator.
And if you're a policeman or you're someone who's in charge of counter organized crime,
you're just a regulator.
You're trying to regulate an illicit industry.
You're regulating an industry that happens to be illicit
and you have no information.
And so that's kind of what we do.
We figure out how the system works
and what are the economic incentives and what are the political incentives?
Any interviews and conversations help with that?
They help a lot, yeah, yeah.
We do that.
I mean, I do some of those, but on the side, my Spanish is okay.
It's not great.
Do you have a translator usually if you ever go directly?
Well, if only because I can't understand the street vernacular.
I'm just totally hopeless.
Nor could many people who speak Spanish as a second language.
It's totally...
You go to prison and you talk to these guys
and they're speaking in the local dialect and it's tough.
But more importantly, I just don't need to be there
and that's not my...
I'm a quantitative scholar.
I'm the guy who collects the data.
So we have people on our team and colleagues and employees
who are doing full time interviews.
And then I just sometimes go with them.
What about if we...
You mentioned Uganda.
Yeah.
Yeah, Joseph Coney, the Ugandan warlord.
I'm seeing here he kidnapped 591 children in three years between 2000.
They must have kidnapped.
They probably kidnapped for at least a short time,
like a few hours to a day, more than 50,000 kids.
As a terror tactic?
A little bit.
I mean, you know, most of those people,
they just let go after they carried goods.
They tried to hold onto thousands.
The short story, listen, if you're not popular,
if you're running in our movement and you need troops,
you can...
And nobody wants to fight for you.
You can either give up
or you can have a small clandestine terror organization
that tries to...
A different set of tactics.
But if you want a conventional army and you don't want to give up,
then you have to conscript.
And if you want to conscript and you don't...
You know, here we conscript and then we say,
if you run away, we'll shoot you.
And we control the whole territory.
So we'll...
That's a credible promise.
If you're a small insurgency organization,
people can run away and then you can't promise to shoot them very easily
because you don't control all the territory.
And what these movements do is they try to brainwash you.
And I think what they figured out after years of abducting children,
you know, you talk about evil,
they figured out that, you know, we have to...
Maybe like, I don't know,
but say like maybe one in a hundred will like buy the rhetoric.
So we just have to conscript or abduct a large number of kids
and then some small number of them will not run away.
And those will be our committed cadres.
And those people can become commanders.
And because they'll buy the propaganda and they'll buy the messianic messages.
But because most people wise up, we have...
Especially as they get older,
we just have to abduct vast numbers of kids in order to have a committed cadre.
And so it has the other benefit of sort of being terrifying for the population
and being a weapon in itself.
But I think for them it was just primarily a way to solve a recruitment problem
when you're a totally like hopeless and ideologically empty rebel movement.
So in some sense it's...
Yeah, so that's maybe the short story. It was a real tragedy.
I heard one interview of a dictator
where the journalist was basically telling them like,
how could you be doing this basically calling out all the atrocities
the person's committing and the dictator was kind of laughing it off and walked away.
And like he cut off the interview.
That feel like a very unproductive thing to be doing.
You're basically stating the thing that everyone knows to his face.
Maybe that's pleasant to somebody, but that feels unproductive.
It feels like the goal should be some level of understanding.
Yeah.
He's been super lucive.
I mean, why he's fought this... I don't even know.
You know, it's not a great example of...
The way I look at that situation is...
It's a little bit particular the way Uganda works,
but most of the political leadership for most of its post independence history
came from the north of the country.
That was like the power base.
And that was dictatorial and they were...
So you've heard of like people like Idi Amin,
but people have heard of like Milton Abote,
and all these people were all from the north.
And then you get the current president who came power in 1986.
So he's been around a long time.
He was from the south.
And he was fighting against these dictators,
and he was fighting for a freer and better Uganda.
And in many ways...
I mean, he's still a dictator himself,
but he did create a freer and better Uganda.
So he's better than these...
He's a thug, but he was better than thugs before him.
And he came to power and he was like...
And these...
Some of the northerners were like,
we want to keep up the fight.
And he was like, you know what, you guys,
I'm strong enough to continue to the north.
You guys go, you want to have a crazy insurgency up there
and some kook believes he's like speaking,
you know, through the Holy Spirit,
you know, speaking through him
and he's going to totally disrupt the north.
I don't care.
That's great.
You guys just fester and fight,
and that's going to totally destabilize this power,
this traditional power base,
and then that's just going to help me consolidate control.
So he was not a crowd.
He was an unchecked leader who allowed a lunatic
to run around and cause mayhem
because it was in his political interest to do so.
And there is no puzzle.
It's in some ways, it's that simple and kind of tragic.
There's little to understand.
Yeah, it took me a lot.
Well, you know what?
It's not so easy.
In the middle of it, I didn't understand that.
I don't think a lot of people did.
And I'm not...
I think I could persuade most people who study or work there now
to like see it that way.
I think people that would make sense to people,
but it didn't make sense in the moment.
You know, in the moment this is happening,
it's terrible and you kind of, you know,
you don't realize how avoidable it was.
Basically, it was the absence of effective police actions
that kept the lunatic from being contained.
And that lunatic would never, you know,
it's not that skillful of our movement, right?
They could have been shut down
and there was just never any political will to shut it down.
The opposite.
That's what I meant.
Like that unchecked leader,
not only do you not bear the cost,
but you might have a private incentive as an autocrat
to like see that violence happen.
And in this case, it was just keeping a troublesome part
of the country busy.
If it's okay to look at a few other wars.
So we talked about drug wars and Medellin.
Are there other wars to stand out to you as full of lessons?
We can jump around a little bit.
Maybe if we can return briefly at World War II
from your framework,
could World War II have been avoided?
This is one of the most traumatic wars, global wars.
I mean, one obvious driver of that war was these,
the things that Hitler valued and then was able
to use his autocratic power to either convince other people
or to suppress them.
And so some people stopped there and say that.
And then in the West basically,
and then of course they were able,
because they were such an economic and political powerhouse,
they were able to sort of make demands of the rest of Europe
that you can kind of see the fold,
letting Nazis march into Denmark without a fight
or France folding very quickly.
You can kind of see as like an appeasement
or an acknowledgement of their superiority
and their ability to bargain without much of a fight.
And then you can see the Western response
as a principled stand.
I think that's, and there's a lot of truth to that.
You know, in terms of the strategic forces,
a lot of political scientists see a version
of a commitment problem basically where Germany says,
you know what, we're strong now, we're temporarily strong,
we're not going to be this strong forever.
If we can get this terrible bargain
and get everyone to capitulate through violence,
if we strike now and then solidify our power
and keep these, in World War I,
it was prevent the rise of Russia
and prevent the strengthening of Russian alliance
as well.
And so we have an incentive to strike now
and there's a window of opportunity that's closing
and that they thought was closing as soon as 1917
in World War I.
And I don't know that that story is as persuasive
in World War II.
I think there was an element of a closing window.
They kept talking about a closing window.
They really thought there's a closing window.
I think it was a nature that windows different
in that there was kind of pacifism
and it seems like if war broke out,
most nations in the vicinity would not be ready.
By the people, the leaders that are in power,
they weren't ready so the timing is really right now.
But I wonder how often that is the case
with leaders in war that feels like the timing is now.
The other commitment problem,
the other shift that was happening that he wanted to avert
that is kind of wrapped up with his ideology
is this idea of a cultural and a demographic window of opportunity
that if conditional on having these views
of a Germanic people and a pure race,
he had to strike now before any opportunity
to sort of establish that was possible.
I think that's one...
It's an incentive that requires his ideology as well.
How do we avoid it within this framework?
Would you say is there...
You kind of provide an explanation,
but is there a way to avoid it?
Is violence the way to avoid it?
Because people kind of tried rational,
peaceful kind of usual negotiation
and that led to this war.
Is that unique to this particular war?
Let's say World War I or World War II.
So there's an extra pressure from Germany
and both wars to act.
So we've highlighted that.
Is there a way to alleviate that extra pressure to act?
Let me use World War I as an example.
Suppose, as many German generals said at that time,
we have a window of opportunity before Russia,
where we might not win a war with Russia.
So the probability that we can win a war
is going to change a lot in the next decade or two,
maybe even in the next few years.
If we were in a much better bargaining position now,
both to not use violence,
but to if necessarily use violence.
Because otherwise, Russia's going to be extremely powerful
in the future and they'll be able to use that power
to change the bargaining with us
and to keep us down.
And the thing is, in principle,
Russia could say, look,
we don't want to get invaded right now.
We know you could invade us.
We know we're weak.
We know we'll be strong in the future.
We promise to not wield our and abuse our
or just merely just sort of take what we can get
in the future when we're strong.
We're going to restrain ourselves in the future.
Or we're going to hand over something that makes us powerful
because that's the bargain that would make us all better off.
And the reason political economists call it a commitment problem
is because that's a commitment that would solve the problem.
And they can't make that commitment
because there's nobody who will hold them accountable.
So anything, any international legal architecture,
any set of enforceable agreements,
any UN Security Council, any world government,
anything that would help you make that commitment
is a solution, all right, if that's the core problem.
And so that's why, you know, in Medellin,
you know, the La Fousina can do that.
They can say, listen, yes, combo that's strong today
is going to be weak tomorrow.
You have an incentive to eliminate this combo over here
because they're going to be strong.
But guess what? You're not going to do that.
And we're going to make sure, we're going to promise
that when these guys do get strong,
we're going to restrain what they can do.
Most of our constitutions in most stable countries
have done precisely that, right?
There's a lot of complaining right now in the United States
about the way that the Constitution is a portion power
between states.
That was a deal, that was a commitment.
The Constitution was, in the United States,
was a deal made to a bunch of states
that knew they were going to be weak in future
because of economic and demographic trends,
or guess they might be, and it said, listen,
you cooperate and will, and will commit
not to basically ignore your interests over the long run.
And now, you know, 250 years later,
we're still honoring those commitments.
It was part of the deal that meant
that there actually would be a union.
And so, we do this all the time.
So, Constitution is a good example of how
every country's Constitution,
especially a country who's writing a Constitution after a war,
that Constitution and all of the other institutions
that are building are in an attempt to, like,
provide commitment to groups who are worried
about future shifts in power.
And does that help with avoid civil war?
Could you speak to lessons you learned from civil wars,
perhaps the American Civil War and the others?
So, Lebanon, one of the ways Lebanon had tried
for a long time to preserve the interests
of minority groups, powerful minority groups
who were powerful at the time and knew
that the demographics were working against them
was to guarantee, you know, this ethnic religious group
gets the presidency and this ethnic religious group
gets the prime ministership and this ethnic,
and a lot of countries will apportion seats
in the parliament to ethnic religious groups.
And that's an attempt to, like,
give a group that's temporarily powerful
some assurances that they're,
when they're weak in the future,
that they'll still have a say, right?
Just like we portion seats in the Senate
in a way that's not demographically representative
but is like unequal, quote, unquote,
in a sense to help people be confident
that there won't be a tyranny of the majority.
And now that just happens to have been,
like, a really unstable arrangement in Lebanon
because eventually, like, the de facto power on the ground
just gets so out of line with this really rigid system
of the presidency goes to this ethnic religious group
and this prime ministership goes,
that it didn't last, right?
But you can think of every post conflict agreement
and every constitution is like a little bit
of humans best effort to find an agreement
that's going to protect the interests of a group
that's temporarily has an interest in violence
in order to not be violent.
And so there's a lot of ingenuity
and it doesn't always work, right?
Which, actually, from a perspective of the group,
threatening violence or actually doing violence
is one way to make progress for your group.
We're talking about groups bargaining over stuff, right?
We're talking about Russians versus Ukraine
or Russians versus in the West
or maybe it's Medizhin gains versus one another.
Like, a lot of their bargaining power
comes from their ability to burn the house down, right?
And so if I want to have more bargaining power,
I can just arm a lot and I can threaten violence.
And so the strategically wise thing to do,
I mean, it's terrible, it's a terrible equilibrium
for us to be forced into,
but the strategically wise thing to do
is to build up lots of arms to threaten to use them,
to credibly threaten to use them,
but then trust or hope that, like,
your enemy is going to see reason
and avoid this really terrible inefficient thing
which is fighting.
But the thing that's going on the whole time
is both of you arming and spending, like,
20% of GDP or whatever on arms,
that's pretty inefficient.
That's the tragedy.
We don't have war and that's good,
but we have really limited abilities
to incentivize our enemies not to arm
and to keep ourselves from arming.
We'd love to agree to just, like, both disarm,
but we can't.
And so the masses that we have to arm
and then we have to threaten all the time.
Yeah, so the threat of violence
is costing, nevertheless.
You've actually pulled up
that now disappeared a paper that said
the big title called Civil War
and your name is on it.
What's that about?
Well, that was, I mean,
when I was finishing graduate school
and this was a paper with my advisor at Ted Miguel,
at Berkeley.
Most nations the paper opens
have experienced an internal armed conflict
since 1960,
yet while were you still in grad school on this or no?
Maybe last year
or just graduated, I think.
I wish I was in a discipline
that wrote papers like this. This is pretty badass.
Yet while Civil War
is central to many nations development,
it has stood
at the periphery
of economic research
and teaching, so on and so forth.
And this is looking at Civil War broadly
throughout history or is it just particular Civil Wars?
You were mostly looking at, like, the late 20th century.
I mean, I was trained
as a development economist,
which is somebody who studies why some places are poor
and why some countries are rich.
And
I, like, a number of people
around that time stumbled into
violence. I mean, people have been studying
the wealth and poverty of nations basically
since the invention of economics.
But there was
a big blind spot
for violence.
Now, there isn't any more.
There's a flourishing area of study
but in economics. But at the time
it wasn't. And so there were people like
me and Ted who
were sort of part political scientists
because political scientists obviously had been
sitting this for a long time, who started bringing
economic tools and expertise
and, like, partnerships with
political scientists and adding to it.
And so we wrote this.
So after, like, people had been doing this for 5 or 10 years
in our field, we wrote, like, a review
article telling economists, like,
what was going on. And so this was, like, a summary
for economists. So the book in some ways is
a lot in the same spirit of this article.
This article, I mean, it's
designed to be not
written as, like, a boring laundry list of studies,
which is what, that's the purpose this article
was. It was for graduate students and professors
who wanted to think about what to work on
and what we knew.
This book is, like, now trying to, like, not
just say what economists are doing, but sort of say
what economists, political scientists,
psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, like,
once, how do we bring
some sense to this big project? And policymakers,
like, what do we know?
And what do we know about building peace?
Given, you know, because
if you don't know what the reason for
wars are, you're probably not going to design
the right cure.
And so anyway, so that was
the, but I started off studying Civil Wars
and I, because I stumbled into
this place in northern Uganda basically
by accident. It was a, never, no
intention of working in Civil Wars. I'd never
thought about it. And then,
you know,
basically, I
followed a woman there.
Oh, we'll talk about that.
I had to ask you first. And for people who are
just watching, where
we have an amazing team of folks helping out
pulling pictures and articles
and so on, mostly so that I can
pull up pictures on Instagram of animals fighting,
which is what I do on my own time.
And then we could discuss, analyze
maybe with George St. Pierre. That's what all he
sends me for people who are curious.
But let me ask you, one of the most
difficult things going on in the world today,
Israel Palestine,
will we ever see peace
in this part of the world? And
sort of your book
title is
The Roots of War and the Paths for Peace,
or the subtitle, Why We Fight.
What's the path for peace?
Will we ever see peace? Yeah.
If we think about this
conflict
in the sense of like this dispute,
this sort of contest,
this contest that's been going on between Israelis
and Palestinians, it's been going on for a century.
And
there are really
just 10 or 15 years
of pretty serious
violence in that span
of time, most of it from 2000
to 2009 and stretching up to like
2014. They're like sporadic
incidents which are really terrible. I'm not trying
to diminish the human cost of these, by the way.
Like I'm just trying to point out that whatever's
happening, as
unpleasant and challenging and difficult as it is,
it's actually not war. And so it is that peace.
There's sort of an uneasy stalemate. The Israelis
and Palestinians are actually pretty good at just sort of
keeping this at a relatively low scale of violence.
There's a whole bunch of like low scale
sporadic
violence that can be
repression of civilians.
It can be
terror bombings and terror actions.
It can be terror
violence. It can be mass
arrests. It can be repression. It can be denying
people the vote. It can be
rattling sabers. All these
things that are happening, right?
And it can be sporadic
three week wars or sporadic,
you know, very brief
episodes of intense violence before
everybody sees sense and then
settles down to this uneasy.
That's not like, we're
right now to think of that as like a peace and there's certainly
a stable agreement, right?
So a stable agreement
and amity and any
ability to move on from
this extreme hostility, we're not there yet
and that's maybe
very far away.
But this is a good example
of two rivals who most
of the time have avoided really intense
violence.
You talked about this, like most
of the time,
rivals just like
avoiding violence and hating each other
in peace.
So is this what peace
does answer my question? Yeah, sometimes.
Is this what peace looks like? Not always.
But I mean, it's
kind of my worry
to go back to like the Russia Ukraine
example. Like I kind of, it's really hard.
It's going to be really hard to find
an agreement
that both sides can feel they can
honor, that they can be explicit about,
that they'll hold to, that will enable them
to move on. Yeah.
Feels like a first step in a long journey
towards a greatness for both nations
in a peaceful time,
flourishing, that kind of thing.
I mean, you can think of like
what's going on in Israel,
Palestine, there's a stalemate.
Both,
both of them are exhausted from the violence
that has occurred. Neither one of them
is quite willing to, for various reasons
to create this sort of stable agreement.
There's a lot of really difficult issues
right now.
And
maybe the sad thing, maybe we'll
end up in the same situation with Russia Ukraine.
This is where, you know, if every, if they
stop fighting one another, but Russia
holds the east of the country and
Crimea and nobody really acknowledges
their right to that,
that might within there just going to be a
lot of tension and skirmishing and violence.
But that never really progresses to war
for 30 years. That would be a sad
but maybe possible
outcome.
So that's kind of where Israel Palestine
looks to me. And so someone,
if we're going to talk about why we fight, then
the question we have to ask is like why
you know, like the second
Intifada, like that was the most violent episode.
Like why did that happen? And why did that
and why did that last several years?
That would be like, we could analyze
that and we could say, what was it about
these periods of violence that led
there to be prolonged intense violence, because
there was nobody's interest that didn't need to happen.
And partly don't talk about that in the book.
I wanted to avoid
really contemporary conflicts
for two reasons. One is
I, things could change really
quickly. I didn't want the book to be dated.
I wanted this to be a book that had like longevity
and that that would
be relevant still in 10 years or 20 years
maybe before someone writes a better one
or an update. Before the human civilization ends.
Exactly.
And circumstances can change really quickly. So I
wanted it to be enduring and meant
partly just avoiding changing things
and changing these and avoiding these controversial
ones. But of course I think about them and so
like a lot of my time, I decided
actually last year to teach a class where I
take all these contemporary conflicts that
wasn't working on the
book and where I wasn't really an expert, whether it's
India Pakistan, China Taiwan,
Israel Palestine,
Mexican cartel state drug wars
and
a few others and then teach a class
on them with students and we'd work through it.
We'd read the book and then we'd say, all right,
none of us are experts. How do we make sense of these places?
And we focus in the
Israel Palestine case of mostly trying to understand
why it got so violent and then
spend a little bit of time on
what the prospects are for
something that's more enduring.
It's hard to know that stuff now. I mean
it's easier to do the full analysis
when it's over when it's over.
Well, Israel
is in like a tough place. They have this
attachment to being part of the West. They have these
attachment to liberal ideals. They have an attachment
to democracy and they have
an attachment to a Jewish state
and that those things
are not so easily compatible
because
to recognize
the rights of
non Jewish citizens
right or to
or to create or to have a one state
solution to the current conflict
undermines the
long term ability to have a Jewish state.
And to do anything else
and to deny that
denies
their liberal
democratic
ideals and
and that's a really hard
contest of
priorities for
to sort out. Yeah, it's complicated. Of course
everything you just said probably has multiple
perspectives on it from other
that would phrase all the same
things but using different words.
Well, I try to analyze these things
in like a dispassionate way.
But unfortunately just having enough conversations
even your dispassionate
description
would be seen as
one that's already picked a side.
And I'll say this
because there's holding these ideals.
I'll give you another example.
United States
also has ideals of freedom
and
and other like human rights.
So it has those ideals
and it also sees itself as a
superpower and as a
deployer of those
enforcer of those ideas in the world.
And so the kind of actions
from a perspective of a lot of people
in that world from children
they get to see drones draw bombs
on their house where
their father is now mother
or dead. They have a very different
view of this.
You're beginning to see why I didn't.
I wanted to write about those things
and think about those things
but I wanted this book
to do something different.
I didn't want it to fall along one of these polarizations.
On a personal level because I think
I'm kind of a liberal democratic
person at heart
my sympathies in that sense lie
in many ways with the Palestinians
despite the way I
just the fact that people
presented and they
and they got
a very raw, real politic kind
of feel like most people in history have gotten
like this raw, real politic kind of deal
in their past, right? Where somebody took some
history by the way.
History is just full of raw deals
for regular people.
And
in both sides
are in a principled way
refusing to make a compromise
and that's not like a both
sides a right kind of argument.
I'm just sort of saying
it's a factual statement
that like neither one wants to compromise
on certain principles
and they're both
they both can construct and in some ways
have very reasonable
have self justifications for those principles
and that's why I'm not very hopeful
as I don't see a way
and to
for them to resolve those things.
Speaking of compromise and war
maybe about one last one
which may be in the future
China and the United States
how do we avoid
an all out hot war
with this other superpower
in the next decade
50 years, 100 years
because
sometimes when it's quiet at night
I can hear in the long distance
the drums of war beating.
Yeah.
You know in the second part of the book I talk about
there's been like these persistent like paths to peace
and one of them is increasing interdependence
and interrelationships and another one
is more checks and balances on power.
I think
there's more but those are two that are really fundamental
here because I think those two things
reduce the incentives
of war in two ways. One is like
remember when we were talking about this really simple
strategic game where
whether Russia and Ukraine or whatever
any two rivals
I want more of the pie than
you get and
the costs of war are deterrents
but only the cost
of war that I feel
right? I don't care. I do not
care about the cost of war to your side
my rival side. I'm not even thinking of that
that's just worth zero to me. I just don't care
in that simple game. Now in reality
many
groups do care about the well being of the other group
at least a little bit right?
We're in some sense to the degree we
first of all if our interests are intertwined
like our economies are intertwined
that
that's not a surefire
way for peace
and we shouldn't get complacent because we have
a globally integrated world but that's going to be a disincentive
and if we're socially entwined
because we have great social relationships
and linkages and family or
we're intermarriage or whatever this is all these
things will
help and then if we're ideologically
intertwined maybe we share a
notions of liberty or maybe we just share
a common notion of humanity so I think
the fact that we're more integrated than we've ever
been on all three fronts in the world
but with China is
providing some insulation which is good
so I would be more
worried if we started to shed
some of that insulation which I think
has been happening a little bit
US economic nationalism
whatever could be the fallout
of these sanctions or a closer Chinese
alliance with Russia all those things
could happen those would make me more
worried because I think we've got a lot of cushion
that comes from all of this
economics, social, cultural
interdependence
Social one with the internet is a big one so
basically make friends
with the people from different nations
fall in love
or you don't have to fall in love you can just
have lots of sex with people from different
nations but also fall in love
the thing that also should comforts me about
China is that they
China is not as centralized
or as personalized
regime as Russia for example
and neither one of them is as centralized
as like a some tin pot
purely personalized dictatorship
like you get in some countries
the fact that China
the power is much more widely shared
is
a big insulation I think against this war
the future war
the
the attempts
by Xi Jinping to personalize
power over time and to make
China a more centralized and
personal ruled place which
is he's successfully
moved in that direction also worries me
so anything that
moves China in the other direction not
necessarily being democratic but just like a
wider and wider group of people
holding power like all of
the business leaders and all the things that
happened in the last few centuries have actually
widened power but anything that's moving
in the other direction does worry me
because it's going to accentuate all these
five risks. I am worried about the
little bit of the demonization so
one of the things
I see with China
as a problem for Americans
maybe I'm projecting
maybe it's just my own problem but you know
there seems to be a bigger cultural gap
than there is with other superpowers throughout history
where it's like
it's almost like this own world
happening in China it's own world in the United States
and there's this gap of total cultural understanding
like it's not that
like we're not
competing superpowers they're almost like doing
their own thing there's that
feeling and I think that means there's
a lack of understanding of culture of people
and we need to kind of bridge that understanding
I mean you know the language barrier
but also cultural understanding making
movies that's
that you use
both and explore both cultures and
all that kind of stuff to where like it's
okay to compete you know like Rocky
where
Rocky Balboa fought the Russian
fact you know
historically inaccurate because obviously the Russian
win but you know we have to
I'm just getting as an affiliate person
I was of course reading for Rocky but the thing is
those two superpowers are in the movies
China is like its own
out there thing
we need more Rocky 7
I do think there's a certain
inscrutability to the politics there and an
insularity to the politics such that it's
harder for Westerners even if they
know even just to learn about it and
understand what's going on that I think that's a problem
and vice versa
so I think that's
true but I at the same time
we could point to all sorts of things on the other side of the ledger
like the massive amounts of
Chinese immigration into the
United States and the massive number of
people who are now like how many
so many more Americans business
people politicians understand
so much more about China now
than they did 30 40 years ago because
we're so intertwined so so I don't know
where where it balances out I think it balances
out on better understanding than ever before
but you're right
there was like a big gulf there
that we haven't totally bridged
yeah and
like I said lots of
inter Chinese and United
States sexual intercourse
no and love and marriage and all
that kind of social social cohesion
so once again returning
to love I read
in your acknowledgement and as
you mentioned earlier the acknowledgement
reads quote
I dedicate this book to a
slow and all defunct internet
cafe in Nairobi
because it set me on the path to meet
work with and
most importantly Mary
Jenny
and on
and there's a lot
a lot of beautiful letters in this beautiful
name this book have been
impossible without her
and that chance encounter
what's okay tell me
tell me Chris how you
fell in love and how that changed the
direction of your life I was in that
internet cafe I think it was 2004
I'd
I was I didn't know what I wanted to do
I thought I might I thought you know
I was a good development economist I cared
about growth economic growth
and I thought firm like industrialization
is like the solution to
poverty in Africa which is I think
still still true
and therefore I need to go study firms
and industry in Africa
and so I went and I ended one of the most dynamic
place for firms and industry at the time
still to some extent now is was Kenya
and the all these firms around Nairobi
and so I went and I got a
job with the World Bank who's running a
they're running a firm survey and I convinced
them to like let me help run the firm
survey because and so now I'm in Nairobi
and I'm wearing my like suit and with the
World Bank for the summer
and my laptop
gets stolen by two enterprising
con artists very charming
and so I find myself in
a cafe with
no laptop with no laptop and
just like you know this can you
didn't exactly can you didn't get connected
to the
the sort of the big internet
cables until maybe 10 years later
and so it was just glacially slow so it would take
10 minutes for every email to load and so
there's this whole customer norm if you just chat
to the next person
in beside you all the time it was
it was true all over anywhere
I'd worked on the continent and
and I so I strategically
sat next to the attractive looking woman that
when I came in and
and it turned out she was a
psychologist I've been a PhD student
but she was a humanitarian worker and
she'd been working in South Sudan and northern
Uganda and this
kids affected by this war all these kids who are
being conscripted we're coming back
because they're all running away after
a day or 10 years and
needed help or to get back into school
she was working on things like that
and and I think
she talked to me in spite of the fact that I was wearing a suit
maybe because I knew a little bit about the war
which most people didn't most people were totally ignorant
and we we had a fling for that
week and then we
didn't really we actually then we met up
a little short while later and then it was
kind of then we kind of drifted apart she was
studying in Indiana and spending a lot of time
in Uganda
and then one day
I was chatting
with someone I knew who worked on this
young professor who was friend
of mine but and I said oh you know
you work on similar issues you should meet this
woman I talked to the
she like you guys would have like you know professional
research interests overlap there's so few
sort of people looking at armed groups
in African civil wars at least at the time
and he said wow that's a fascinating
research
question and I thought and I walked out of the
building and I thought
is a fascinating research question and I
phoned Jeannie and I
and I said remember me and you know tell me
more I was just talking to someone with this tell me more
like I started asking her more questions
but we ended up talking for two or three hours
and over
the course of those three hours we hatched
a very
ambitious kind of crazy
and like
plan we basically what it was
we were going to like find
the names and all the kids were born
like 20 or 30 years ago
in the region and we were going to
track a thousand of them that we're going to
randomly sample them and then we're going to find them today
and we're going to track them and then we were going
to use like some variation
exposure to violence and where the rebel group was
to actually like show what happens
to people when they're exposed to violence and conscription
we were going to like tell you know psychologically
economically we're going to like answer questions
and that which would help you design better
programs right and so we hatched this plan
which is totally cockamamie
so cockamamie that when
I pulled my previous
dissertation proposal from
my committee like the next week and gave them
a new one
they unanimously met without
me to decide that this was totally
bonkers
and to advise me not to go
and they coordinated to read my old proposal so that
when I showed up for my defense they said you actually
think you're defending but we were actually we want
you to only talk about this other thing you were going to do
because this is like you should not go
oh wow
and I mean it is incredibly ambitious super
interesting though it actually worked exactly
according to plants the first and last time
in my entire career you actually pulled off
an ambition like a gigantically crazy
well all of my work that's my
stick like my day to day research job is not
writing books but why we fight my thing
is like I go I collect
data on things that nobody else thought you could
collect data on and so I always
do pull it off but it never turns out
like I thought it was going to like
it's always there's so many twists and turns and always
goes sideways in an interesting
way and it works but it's all but this one
actually we pulled off in spite of
ourselves and as
planned and
and so Ted Miguel who I wrote that paper with was actually
the one person of my
advisor who was like well
you know what he's he was sympathetic to this he was like
yeah why don't you just go for a couple
months and like check it out and then come back
and work on the other thing and that's and so
I followed Jeannie there and went there and then
she but and
I don't know what's this I always remember
you know this movie Speed the
Ken Reeves and
and Sandra whatever these people are and
they have this relationship in these intense
circumstances and they're like well and I think
at the end of the movie they're sort of like this will never
work because these relationships in intense
circumstances never matter which is what we assumed
and that
does not be true so we've been married
15 years and with two kids
and yeah and that's when you fell in love
with psychology and don't appreciate
the power of psychology exactly
that's the psychology in the book as well because
I and so we ended up we were for most of
our work for the first five or ten years was together
actually what's the hardest
piece of data
that you've been
chasing that you've chased in your life
like what are some interesting things because
you mentioned like one of the things you
kind of want to go somewhere in the world
and find evidence
and data for things that people just
haven't really looked to get
gain an understanding of human nature maybe from
an economics perspective what's
what what kind of stuff either
in your past or in your future you've
been thinking about well I mean the hardest
the hardest
the hardest emotionally was
interviewing all those kids in northern Uganda
that was just like a gut punch
every day
and just hearing the stories like that
was the hardest but it
wasn't hard because it was you could the kids
were everywhere and everybody would talk to you about it
and they could talk about it you could
no one had gone and interviewed
kids that had gone through war
in the middle of an active war zone nobody was going to
displace all the things we did no one had done that before
so now lots of people do it
could you actually speak to their
their stories what what's
like the shape of their suffering
what
what were common themes
what how did that those
stories change you
I remember I said you can give you like your
dispassion itself and your
passion itself I think
I had to learn to create the dispassion itself
I mean we all have that capacity when we analyze
something that's far away and happens to people
different than us but you have to
I think I
discovered and developed
an ability to like
put those aside in order to be able to study this
so you get
maybe harder in a way that you have to
be guard against so you have to
try to remember to put your human head on
it's really horrible like if I
want to conscript you
and I don't want you to run away
then I want to make you think you can never go
back to your village
and the best way for me to do that
is for to make you force you to do something
really really really
really horrible that you could you almost
incredibly believe you can never really go
back and it might be like killing
a loved one and so
and just having hearing people
tell you that story
in all the different shapes
and forms to point what was
horrible about it is they did this so routinely
that you'd be sitting there in an interview
with somebody and they'd be telling
you the story and it's like the most horrible
thing that could happen to you or anyone else
and but there's some
voice in the back of your mind saying okay
we
really need to get to the other thing
you know we know that I know how this goes
like I've heard you know there's this thing like okay okay
I'm not learning anything new here
like there's some part you know
deep evil terrible part of you that's like yeah yeah
yeah like but let's get
on to the other thing but I know I have to go through this
but every day you have to go through that to get to the
because you're trying to actually understand how to help
people you're trying to understand how that trauma
has manifested how they either some people get stronger
as a result of that some people get weaker
and if you want to know how to help people
then you need to get to that I wasn't trying
to get to something for my selfish purposes really
I was trying to figure out okay we need to know
what your symptoms are now it's a dark
thing about us
so if you're surrounded by trauma
God that voice in the back of your
head that you just go yeah I know exactly
how this conversation goes let's skip ahead
to the to the solutions
to the next yeah
and that was that was yeah so that was
because you then have to deal with yourself so it's very
helpful if you like come home every night to
someone who's a gone through the same thing and be
as a professional and very very very
very good counseling psychologist
the
the hardest thing I mean this the
organized crime stuff has been the hardest
just figuring out how to get that information
took us years of just trial
and error mostly error of like just how
to get people to talk to us
or how to collect data in a
way that's safe for me and safe
for my team and safe
for people to answer a survey like how do you
get how do you get
the information on
what gangs are doing in the
community or how it's hurting or
helping people like you've got to run surveys
and you've got to talk to gang members all these things
that nobody knows how to do that
and so we had to sort of really slowly
not nobody there's a few other think there's
other academics like me who are doing this
but there's a pretty small group
that's trying to like collect
systematic data and then there's
a slightly bigger and much
more experienced group that's been talking to
different armed groups but every
time you go to a new city and there weren't that many
people working on this in Medellin there were a few
you have to like discover a new
like it's really going to unique to that city
in place so there's not
there's not like a website for
each of the 17 mafia groups
there's no Facebook group in Indiana
well there is now we have a we've created like our own
we have a private wiki where
we document everything and it's a collaborative enterprise
between lots of researchers and journalists
and things so they now they can't see you can't go
online and see this and that's that's individual
researchers it's not I mean they're
yeah hiding by design some of them
have Facebook pages and things of this nature
so they do have public profiles a little bit but not
not not so explicitly
no so they're clandestine here's an example
so one of the things that's really endemic in
Medellin it's true in a lot of cities
it's true in American prisons is gangs
govern everybody's everyday life
so if you have a
in an American prison particularly
Illinois or California Texas is another big one
but also
in a city in Medellin if you have
a problem
a debt to collect or dispute with a neighbor
or something you could go to the government
and they do and they can help you
solve it or you go to the police or you can go to the gang
and so
and that's like a really everyday phenomenon
but then then there's a question like how do you actually
how do you actually
figure out how what services they're offering
and how much they pay for them and do you actually
like those services and how do they how do you
comparison shop between
the police and the gang
and what would get you to go from
the gang to the police and then how's the gang
strategically going to respond to that
and what was the impact of previous policies
to like make
state governing better and how did the gangs react
and so that's we had to sort of figure that out
and that that was
so that was just hard in a different way but I don't do the
most they're mostly punishing stuff I couldn't do any longer
so that's much easier
in that sense
by the way and
you know Jorge Cho as some of these
folks are out of prison yeah have you got a chance
to talk nobody
one of my collaborators on this guy named
Gustavo Duncan who's
spent a lot of time interviewing
pair militaries has written a book he's
talked to more of these people than I
have I haven't talked to
those
we haven't been talking to them about this
but also they were they were there in a different
era yeah so it doesn't the system
was totally different that's super interesting maybe one
day we'll do that we're trying to industry yeah
if that was 30 years ago
yeah and the system over
I mean La Oficina Pablo Escobar
created La Oficina he integrated
what's what the all these 17
the Rosones and all these street gangs are the
fragmented former remnants of his more
unified empire which he gave
the name La Oficina I mean the
I think you know it's a little bit apocryphal
but it the idea is you know I think he said
every doctor has an office
so should we
I still can
I still love that there's parallels
between these
mafia groups and the United Nations
yeah Security Council
this is just wonderful so so
so deeply human
let me ask you about yourself so
you've been thinking about war
here in part dispassionately
just analyze
war and try to understand
the path for peace but you as a single individual
that's going to die one day
maybe talking to
the people that have gone through suffering what
do you think about your own mortality
how has your view of
your own finiteness changed
haven't thought about war
maybe the reason I can do this work is because
I don't think about it a lot
your own mortality or even like
mortality
yeah I mean well I have to think about death a lot
so
but there's a way to think about death like
numbers in a calculation
when you're doing geopolitical negotiations
and then there's like
a dying child
or a dying mother
yeah I guess I know
I'm in a place where there's risk and so I
think a lot about
minimizing
any risk such that I
I think I think about mortality enough that I
just
because I'm kind of an anxious person
and so like I'm kind of a worry ward
like in a way
and so I'm really
obsessive about
making sure anything that I do is low
risk you know
that gives you something to focus on
a number is the risk and you're trying
to minimize it
and yet there's still the existential dread
your risk
minimization doesn't matter
yeah I've never been in a life
threatening situation
that's somebody who you know what you sound like
that's Alex Honnold that does the
free climbing
he doesn't see that as like
sounds exactly the same
because you just said I've never done anything
as dangerous as those people right
right so I've actually been
a rock climber for like 25 years with
a long break in the between
but I'm the same way you know actually
rock climbing is an extremely safe sport
if you're very careful
but he's free climbing is the opposite of that
but I mean like if you're like you've got a
rope that's attached to you that goes
up is like attached to 18 trees
and comes back down
you're you're fine like this you know
anywhere helmet you're good
you're totally fine yeah but
this is super safe too because
don't free climbing no no no we're watching
free climbing I mean
because you're only going to put your hands
and feet on sturdy rock and
and then you know the path and
no no no no
I know I know some
I have some friends in college
known people who do some of these
totally wacky extreme sports and have paid
the price so
I think it's totally
totally different I think
so even in that
by the way this I can't even watch those movies
because those freak me out too much because it's just too risky
like I can't I don't even
yeah so those things I've never
watched like free solo or anything there's just
too much still not as
dangerous as riding a scooter and all
I'm not gonna let that go
so but even in that
it's just a risk minimization
in the work that you do versus
the sort of philosophical
existentialist
view of your mortality you know this
like this thing just ends
like what the hell is that about
yeah I have this amazing capacity
not to think about it which might just be a self defense mechanism
you know my father in law
Genie's father is an evangelical
pastor actually he's now retired but
um and
this he would we would talk about
when we're getting married they weren't terribly thrilled
that she was
uh marrying a agnostic
atheist or something we love each other
very much it's fine now but
I only started discussing this and some of the
because that was one of his questions for me
like well how can you possibly believe
that there's nothing afterwards
because that's just like too horrible
to imagine and we
we really never saw eye to eye on this and my
view was like listen like
I can't convince myself I believe what I'd like
I can't convince myself otherwise anything else seems
completely implausal to me
and for some reason I can't understand
I'm at peace with that like it's never bothered
me that one day it's over
and and I understood the fact
that people have angst about
that and that they would seek answers
makes total sense to me
and and I can't explain why
that doesn't consume me
or doesn't bother me
um but and yet
you are at peace
yep maybe if I was worried
but if I was more worried about it maybe I wouldn't be able to do
I don't know I don't know but I then again
I don't take the risk I'm still like I don't know
but I minimize all sorts of risks I'm like
I
yeah I minimize
you know I try to optimize
like groceries in the fridge too like I mean
I put very
way to live I would say
that's probably why you're good at that might be true
that might be there's some selection and economics
of these cold calculators
chicken or the egg we'll never know
do you have advice for young people
that want to do as ambitious
as crazy as
amazing of work as you have done
in life so somebody who's in
high school and college
either career advice
on what to choose how to
execute on it or just life advice
how to meet
some random stranger or maybe a dating advice
how to
that part's easy you have to fly coach
and go to the internet cafes
you can't like yeah all the development
workers that I know that fly business class
and like you'll never meet somebody
no the you know I
actually spent a lot of time writing advice on my
blog and I've got like pages and pages of
advice and one of the reasons is because I
never got that like when I grew up I went to
like a really good state school in
Canada called Waterloo I loved
it but people didn't go on the trajectory
that I went on from there and
I had some good advisors there but
but I never got the kind of advice I needed
to like pursue this career so I
it's very
concentrated in elite colleges I think
sometimes in elite high schools so I
tried to democratize that that's like a that
was one reason I started the blog
but a lot of that's really particular because I every week
like I have students coming in my office wanting to
know how to do international development work and I just spent a lot of time
giving them advice and I think that's what a
lot of the posts are about they have every specific
questions like what is it that country by
country kind of specific questions or what
the thing that they're all trying to do that I think is the right I don't
have to give them a really basic piece of advice because
they're already doing it like they're trying to
find a vocation they they they're
really interested and what I mean by that
is it's like a career where they find meaning
where the work is almost
like superfluous because that they just
and they would do it for free
and they're passionate about and they really find meaning
in the work and and
and then it becomes a little bit all consuming so
scientists do that in their own way I think
international development humanitarian workers people
who are doctors and nurses like we all
do our careers for other reasons right but
but they they find like
meaning in their career and so the thing
so I don't have to tell them
whatever you do find meaning
and try to make it a vocation
something that you would do for free
amongst all of these many many many options
that's
what I would tell but that's what I would tell
high school students and young
people in college
sometimes it's hard to find
a thing and hold on to it
well that's the other thing it took me a
long time so I actually started off as
an accountant I was an accountant with Deloitte and Touche
for a few years so I
I did not that
did you wake up in the morning excited
to be alive I was miserable
I got I found it by accident
which is another different story but I
landed in this job and a degree
where I study accounting and I was miserable
I was totally miserable
and I hated it and it was becoming a miserable
person
and so I eventually just quit
and I did something new but I was
still you know but then I was working in
the private sector and I actually just need
trial and error I actually had to try on like three
or four or five careers before I found like
this mixture of academia and activism
and research and international development
and so did you know that this
was love when you
when you found this kind of international development
that this was the academic
context too the key lesson
was just trial and error which we all have to engage in
until it feels right it's okay
all right step one is trial and error but until it
feels right because like
it often feels right but not
perfect yeah it's true
right enough I mean I was really
intellectually engaged like I just loved
learning about it I wanted to read more like it
in some sense like
like I was doing I was an accountant but I was reading
about like ruled
history and international development and poor countries in my spare time
right and so it was
like this hobby and I was like wait a second I could
actually do that like just
I could like research just didn't even write
the neck those books and that's kind of what I did
like 25 years later
that didn't occur to me right away I didn't even know it was
possible this is the other thing people do
people do their 9 to 5 job
and then they find meeting and everything else they do
they're volunteering and their family and their hobbies
and things and that was my social media
and and and that's a great
path to like I mean that's because not all of us
can just have a vocation or you don't find it I think
and then you just circumscribe what you do in your
work and then you go find
um and that's not entirely true because
everyone in my family does like their job
and get a lot of fulfillment out of it but
um but I think it's not
it's that's that's a
different path in some ways so it's good to
take the leap and keep trying stuff even
when you found like a little local
local minima yeah
the hardest part was
it got easy after a while
it was was quitting
but but now I take this to a lot of you know and
one of the people I think
one of the reasons I discovered your podcast or maybe
Tyler Cowan yeah he's amazing
Tyler takes this approach to everything
he takes this approach to movie
he's like walk to the movie theater
after half an hour if you don't like the movie
and um
you know what kind of person he probably is
I don't know but now that you say this
he's probably somebody that goes to a restaurant
if the if the meals is not good
I could see him just walking yeah like
paying for and just walking away yeah meal
and go eat something better that's exactly
right and I thought that was kind of crazy
and I'd never I was the person I would never
just put a book down halfway and I would
never um
stop watching a movie but then I and I
convinced my wife we lived in New York when we were
when we when we're single initially
sorry number when we were childless
uh and we lived in New York
there's all this culture and
theater and stuff and I just said let's go to
more plays but let's just walk out
after the first act if we don't like it and she
thought that was a bit crazy and I was like no no no here's
the logic here's what Tyler says and then
we started doing it and it was so freeing and glorious
we just go we take so many more chances on things
yeah and we would and if we
didn't like it we and we were walking out of stuff all the
time um and so
I I think I did that we're
realizing that that's how I like took I just
kept quitting my jobs yeah
and trying to find something else that like some risk
because that's how war start without the commitment
I go
time back you need
the commitment otherwise
uh no that's a different kind of commitment
problem that's a different different commitment
problem so some of it that I'm sure there's a
balance because I mean the same thing is happening
with dating and marriage and all those kinds of things
and there's some value to sticking
it out because some of
the like maybe
you know don't leave after the first act
because the good stuff might be coming
yeah that's a good point I mean that's
yeah well
I don't know so when I met
she was very wary of a relationship
with me because I explained to her
um I hadn't had a relationship
longer than two or three months and 11 years
and so she thought this person
thought serious and what I said to her
she tells the story this is how she tells the story she says I
didn't believe him when he said that I just after
two or three months you kind of have a good sense
but whether this is going somewhere and I would
just decide if it was over so and I walk
away so I took this approach to dating like as soon as I
thought it wasn't going to go somewhere
and and then I have and then I decided
with her that this was it this was going to work
and then I like and then never and
she didn't believe now she believes me
haha
finally got to be right
okay so this is an incredible conversation
your work is so fascinating just in this
um
big picture way looking at human conflict
and how we can achieve peace
especially in this time
of the Ukraine war I really
really appreciate that you
calmly speak to me about some of these difficult
ideas and explain them and
you sit down with me and have this amazing
conversation thank you so much
thank you
thanks for listening to this conversation with Chris Blackman
to support this podcast please check out our
sponsors in the description
and now let me leave you some well known
simple words from Albert Einstein
I know not
with what weapons world war three will be fought
but world war
war four will be fought with sticks
and stones
thank you for listening and hope to see you
next time